Search the API docs Search docs Suggested responses create reasoning_effort realtime prompt caching Primary navigation Search docs Suggested responses create reasoning_effort realtime prompt caching Get started Overview Quickstart Models Pricing Libraries Latest: GPT-5.4 Prompt guidance Core concepts Text generation Code generation Images and vision Audio and speech Structured output Function calling Responses API Agents Overview Build agents Agent Builder Node reference Safety in building agents Agents SDK Deploy in your product ChatKit Custom theming Widgets Actions Advanced integration Optimize Agent evals Trace grading Voice agents Tools Using tools Web search MCP and Connectors Skills Shell Computer use File search and retrieval File search Retrieval Tool search More tools Apply Patch Local shell Image generation Code interpreter Run and scale Conversation state Background mode Streaming WebSocket mode Webhooks File inputs Context management Compaction Counting tokens Prompt caching Prompting Overview Prompt engineering Citation formatting Reasoning Reasoning models Reasoning best practices Evaluation Getting started Working with evals Prompt optimizer External models Best practices Realtime API Overview Connect WebRTC WebSocket SIP Usage Using realtime models Managing conversations MCP servers Webhooks and server-side controls Managing costs Realtime transcription Voice agents Model optimization Optimization cycle Fine-tuning Supervised fine-tuning Vision fine-tuning Direct preference optimization Reinforcement fine-tuning RFT use cases Best practices Graders Specialized models Image generation Video generation Text to speech Speech to text Deep research Embeddings Moderation Going live Production best practices Latency optimization Overview Predicted Outputs Priority processing Cost optimization Overview Batch Flex processing Accuracy optimization Safety Safety best practices Safety checks Cybersecurity checks Under 18 API Guidance Legacy APIs Assistants API Migration guide Deep dive Tools Resources Terms and policies Changelog Your data Permissions Rate limits Deprecations MCP for deep research Developer mode ChatGPT Actions Introduction Getting started Actions library Authentication Production Data retrieval Sending files Getting Started Overview Quickstart Explore Pricing Community Concepts Prompting Customization Sandboxing Subagents Workflows Models Cyber Safety Using Codex App Overview Features Settings Review Automations Worktrees Local Environments Commands Windows Troubleshooting IDE Extension Overview Features Settings IDE Commands Slash commands CLI Overview Features Command Line Options Slash commands Web Overview Environments Internet Access Integrations GitHub Slack Linear Codex Security Overview Setup Improving the threat model FAQ Configuration Config File Config Basics Advanced Config Config Reference Sample Config Speed Rules AGENTS.md MCP Skills Subagents Administration Authentication Agent approvals & security Enterprise Admin Setup Governance Managed configuration Windows Automation Non-interactive Mode Codex SDK App Server MCP Server GitHub Action Learn Best practices Videos Blog Using skills to accelerate OSS maintenance Building frontend UIs with Codex and Figma View all Cookbooks Codex Prompting Guide Modernizing your Codebase with Codex View all Building AI Teams Releases Changelog Feature Maturity Open Source Apps SDK Commerce Home Quickstart Core Concepts MCP Apps in ChatGPT MCP Server UX principles UI guidelines Plan Research use cases Define tools Design components Build Set up your server Build your ChatGPT UI Authenticate users Manage state Monetize your app Examples Deploy Deploy your app Connect from ChatGPT Test your integration Submit your app Guides Optimize Metadata Security & Privacy Troubleshooting Resources Changelog App submission guidelines Reference Home Guides Get started Best practices File Upload Overview Products API Overview Feeds Products Promotions Showcase Blog Cookbook Learn Community Home All posts Recent Designing delightful frontends with GPT-5.4 From prompts to products: One year of Responses Using skills to accelerate OSS maintenance Building frontend UIs with Codex and Figma Run long horizon tasks with Codex Topics General API Apps SDK Audio Codex Home Topics Agents Evals Multimodal Text Guardrails Optimization ChatGPT Codex gpt-oss Contribute Cookbook on GitHub Home Docs MCP Categories Demo apps Videos Topics Agents Audio & Voice Computer use Codex Evals gpt-oss Fine-tuning Image generation Scaling Tools Video generation Community Programs Codex Ambassadors Codex for Students Codex for Open Source Events Meetups Hackathon Support Forum Discord API Dashboard Copy Page More page actions Copy Page More page actions Model prompts often contain repetitive content, like system prompts and common instructions. OpenAI routes API requests to servers that recently processed the same prompt, making it cheaper and faster than processing a prompt from scratch. Prompt Caching can reduce latency by up to 80% and input token costs by up to 90%. Prompt Caching works automatically on all your API requests (no code changes required) and has no additional fees associated with it. Prompt Caching is enabled for all recent models , gpt-4o and newer. This guide describes how Prompt Caching works in detail, so that you can optimize your prompts for lower latency and cost. Structuring prompts Cache hits are only possible for exact prefix matches within a prompt. To realize caching benefits, place static content like instructions and examples at the beginning of your prompt, and put variable content, such as user-specific information, at the end. This also applies to images and tools, which must be identical between requests. How it works Caching is enabled automatically for prompts that are 1024 tokens or longer. When you make an API request, the following steps occur: Cache Routing : Requests are routed to a machine based on a hash of the initial prefix of the prompt. The hash typically uses the first 256 tokens, though the exact length varies depending on the model. If you provide the prompt_cache_key parameter, it is combined with the prefix hash, allowing you to influence routing and improve cache hit rates. This is especially beneficial when many requests share long, common prefixes. If requests for the same prefix and prompt_cache_key combination exceed a certain rate (approximately 15 requests per minute), some may overflow and get routed to additional machines, reducing cache effectiveness. Cache Lookup : The system checks if the initial portion (prefix) of your prompt exists in the cache on the selected machine. Cache Hit : If a matching prefix is found, the system uses the cached result. This significantly decreases latency and reduces costs. Cache Miss : If no matching prefix is found, the system processes your full prompt, caching the prefix afterward on that machine for future requests. Prompt cache retention Prompt Caching can either use in-memory or extended retention policies. When available, Extended Prompt Caching aims to retain the cache for longer, so that subsequent requests are more likely to match the cache. Prompt cache pricing is the same for both retention policies. To configure the prompt cache retention policy, set the prompt_cache_retention parameter on your Responses.create request (or chat.completions.create if using Chat Completions). In-memory prompt cache retention In-memory prompt cache retention is available for all models that support Prompt Caching. When using the in-memory policy, cached prefixes generally remain active for 5 to 10 minutes of inactivity, up to a maximum of one hour. In-memory cached prefixes are only held within volatile GPU memory. Extended prompt cache retention Extended prompt cache retention is available for the following models: gpt-5.4 gpt-5.2 gp5-5.1-codex-max gpt-5.1 gpt-5.1-codex gpt-5.1-codex-mini gpt-5.1-chat-latest gpt-5 gpt-5-codex gpt-4.1 Extended prompt cache retention keeps cached prefixes active for longer, up to a maximum of 24 hours. Extended Prompt Caching works by offloading the key/value tensors to GPU-local storage when memory is full, significantly increasing the storage capacity available for caching. key/value tensors are the intermediate representation from the model’s attention layers produced during prefill. Only the key/value tensors may be persisted in local storage; the original customer content, such as prompt text, is only retained in memory. Configure per request If you don’t specify a retention policy, the default is in_memory . Allowed values are in_memory and 24h . 1 2 3 4 5 { "model" : "gpt-5.1" , "input" : "Your prompt goes here..." , "prompt_cache_retention" : "24h" } Requirements Caching is available for prompts containing 1024 tokens or more. All requests, including those with fewer than 1024 tokens, will display a cached_tokens field of the usage.prompt_tokens_details Response object or Chat object indicating how many of the prompt tokens were a cache hit. For requests under 1024 tokens, cached_tokens will be zero. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 "usage" : { "prompt_tokens" : 2006 , "completion_tokens" : 300 , "total_tokens" : 2306 , "prompt_tokens_details" : { "cached_tokens" : 1920 }, "completion_tokens_details" : { "reasoning_tokens" : 0 , "accepted_prediction_tokens" : 0 , "rejected_prediction_tokens" : 0 } } What can be cached Messages: The complete messages array, encompassing system, user, and assistant interactions. Images: Images included in user messages, either as links or as base64-encoded data, as well as multiple images can be sent. Ensure the detail parameter is set identically, as it impacts image tokenization. Tool use: Both the messages array and the list of available tools can be cached, contributing to the minimum 1024 token requirement. Structured outputs: The structured output schema serves as a prefix to the system message and can be cached. Best practices Structure prompts with static or repeated content at the beginning and dynamic, user-specific content at the end. Use the prompt_cache_key parameter consistently across requests that share common prefixes. Select a granularity that keeps each unique prefix- prompt_cache_key combination below 15 requests per minute to avoid cache overflow. Monitor your cache performance metrics , including cache hit rates, latency, and the proportion of tokens cached, to refine your strategy. You can monitor your cached token counts by logging the usage field results as shown above, or in the OpenAI Usage dashboard. Maintain a steady stream of requests with identical prompt prefixes to minimize cache evictions and maximize caching benefits. Frequently asked questions How is data privacy maintained for caches? Prompt caches are not shared between organizations. Only members of the same organization can access caches of identical prompts. Does Prompt Caching affect output token generation or the final response of the API? Prompt Caching does not influence the generation of output tokens or the final response provided by the API. Regardless of whether caching is used, the output generated will be identical. This is because only the prompt itself is cached, while the actual response is computed anew each time based on the cached prompt. Is there a way to manually clear the cache? Manual cache clearing is not currently available. Prompts that have not been encountered recently are automatically cleared from the cache. Typical cache evictions occur after 5-10 minutes of inactivity, though sometimes lasting up to a maximum of one hour during off-peak periods. Will I be expected to pay extra for writing to Prompt Caching? No. Caching happens automatically, with no explicit action needed or extra cost paid to use the caching feature. Do cached prompts contribute to TPM rate limits? Yes, as caching does not affect rate limits. Does Prompt Caching work on Zero Data Retention requests? In-memory cache retention is Zero Data Retention eligible. If you specify extended caching in the request, then that request is not considered Zero Data Retention eligible because the key/value tensors may be held in GPU-local storage, and the key-value tensors are derived from customer content. However, the extended caching request will not be blocked if Zero Data Retention is enabled for your project. The other Zero Data Retention still applies, such as excluding customer content from abuse logs and preventing use of store=True . See the Your data guide for more context on Zero Data Retention. Does Prompt Caching work with Data Residency? In-memory Prompt Caching is compatable with all Data Residency regions. Extended caching is only compatible with Data Residency regions that include Regional Inference.
