Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert {{ message }} anthropics / claude-code Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 11.1k Star 90.5k [BUG] Claude Code always asks for permission to read two levels above where it is run, even though it needs to read in a subfolder of current directory #30527 New issue Copy link New issue Copy link Closed Closed [BUG] Claude Code always asks for permission to read two levels above where it is run, even though it needs to read in a subfolder of current directory #30527 Copy link Labels api:vertex Issue relates to GCP Vertex Issue relates to GCP Vertex area:permissions bug Something isn't working Something isn't working platform:macos Issue specifically occurs on macOS Issue specifically occurs on macOS Description rua-datacom opened on Mar 3, 2026 Issue body actions Preflight Checklist I have searched existing issues and this hasn't been reported yet This is a single bug report (please file separate reports for different bugs) I am using the latest version of Claude Code What's Wrong? Run Claude from a project folder. Everything it needs is in current folder or a subfolder. Instruct Claude to make a plan to implement something. Claude starts planning. Claude needs to read some source code file. Claude asks for permission to read that specific file only. Why? It has permission to read anything in current folder. If it doesn't, I want to give it that permission. There should be a very simple "allow read" permission with path/glob. The options to grant permission are: Yes - but ask me again for the next file, and the next file, and the next file, wow this is painful. Yes , allow reading from {two levels up} - no way man, those are other projects, don't be confusing your context, just read from the CURRENT FOLDER PLEASE No … I give up What Should Happen? My expectations are: When planning, Claude has permission to read all files in the current directory. Claude should not ask for permission to read stuff or folders that are not relevant or even nearby. There should be simple way to set or customise permissions to prevent read of some folders/files, e.g. in settings.json Read settings should not be "bash" tool permissions - i.e. grep a file, cat a file are ok if they are read only. Error Messages/Logs Steps to Reproduce Run Claude from a project folder. Everything it needs is in current folder or a subfolder. Instruct Claude to make a plan to implement something. Claude starts planning. Claude Model Opus Is this a regression? I don't know Last Working Version No response Claude Code Version 2.1.39 Platform Google Vertex AI Operating System macOS Terminal/Shell Terminal.app (macOS) Additional Information This may be new behaviour, I don't see this all the time, I don't understand why it happens . The folder path has spaces in it, I hope that's not relevant. Reactions are currently unavailable Metadata Metadata Assignees No one assigned Labels api:vertex Issue relates to GCP Vertex Issue relates to GCP Vertex area:permissions bug Something isn't working Something isn't working platform:macos Issue specifically occurs on macOS Issue specifically occurs on macOS Type No type Projects No projects Milestone No milestone Relationships None yet Development No branches or pull requests Issue actions You can’t perform that action at this time.
