Skip to main content Claude Code Docs home page English Search... ⌘ K Ask AI Search... Navigation Use Claude Code Choose a permission mode Getting started Build with Claude Code Deployment Administration Configuration Reference Resources Getting started Overview Quickstart Changelog Core concepts How Claude Code works Extend Claude Code Explore the .claude directory Explore the context window Use Claude Code Store instructions and memories Permission modes Common workflows Best practices Platforms and integrations Overview Remote Control Claude Code on the web Claude Code on desktop Chrome extension (beta) Computer use (preview) Visual Studio Code JetBrains IDEs Code review & CI/CD Claude Code in Slack On this page Switch permission modes Available modes Analyze before you edit with plan mode When to use plan mode Start and use plan mode Eliminate prompts with auto mode How actions are evaluated How auto mode handles subagents What the classifier blocks by default When auto mode falls back Allow only pre-approved tools with dontAsk mode Skip all checks with bypassPermissions mode Compare permission approaches Customize permissions further See also Permission modes control whether Claude asks before acting. Different tasks call for different levels of autonomy: you might want full oversight for sensitive work, minimal interruptions for a long refactor, or read-only access while exploring a codebase. This page covers how to: Switch modes during a session, at startup, or as a default Choose a mode based on what Claude should be able to do without asking Run auto mode with background safety checks, and see what it blocks by default Plan changes read-only before approving edits Restrict Claude to pre-approved tools for locked-down environments Skip checks entirely in isolated environments ​ Switch permission modes You can switch modes at any time during a session, at startup, or as a persistent default. The mechanism depends on where you’re running Claude Code. CLI JetBrains VS Code Desktop Web and mobile During a session : press Shift+Tab to cycle through default → acceptEdits → plan → auto . The current mode appears in the status bar. auto does not appear in the cycle until you pass --enable-auto-mode at startup. Auto also requires a Team, Enterprise, or API plan and Claude Sonnet 4.6 or Opus 4.6, so the option may remain unavailable even with the flag. If bypassPermissions is also enabled, it appears in the cycle between plan and auto . At startup : pass the mode as a CLI flag: claude --permission-mode plan As a default : set defaultMode in your settings file : { "permissions" : { "defaultMode" : "acceptEdits" } } Non-interactively : the same flag works with -p for scripted runs: claude -p "refactor auth" --permission-mode acceptEdits dontAsk is never in the Shift+Tab cycle. bypassPermissions appears in the cycle only if you started the session with --permission-mode bypassPermissions , --dangerously-skip-permissions , or --allow-dangerously-skip-permissions . The third flag adds the mode to the cycle without activating it, so you can compose it with a different starting mode like --permission-mode plan . Set any of these at startup or in your settings file. The JetBrains plugin launches Claude Code in the IDE terminal, so switching modes works the same as in the CLI: press Shift+Tab to cycle, or pass --permission-mode when launching. During a session : click the mode indicator at the bottom of the prompt box to switch modes. As a default : set claudeCode.initialPermissionMode in VS Code settings, or use the Claude Code extension settings panel. The VS Code UI uses friendly labels that map to the settings keys below: UI label Settings key Ask permissions default Auto accept edits acceptEdits Plan mode plan Auto auto Bypass permissions bypassPermissions Auto and Bypass permissions appear only after you enable Allow dangerously skip permissions in the extension settings. Auto also requires a Team, Enterprise, or API plan and Claude Sonnet 4.6 or Opus 4.6, so the option may remain unavailable even with the toggle on. See the VS Code guide for extension-specific details. During a session : use the mode selector next to the send button. You can change it before or during a session. The Desktop UI uses friendly labels that map to the settings keys below: UI label Settings key Ask permissions default Auto accept edits acceptEdits Plan mode plan Auto auto Bypass permissions bypassPermissions Auto and Bypass permissions appear in the selector only after you enable them in Desktop settings. See the Desktop guide for details. During a session : use the mode dropdown next to the prompt box on claude.ai/code or in the Claude mobile app. For Claude Code on the web sessions running on Anthropic’s cloud VMs, the dropdown offers Auto accept edits and Plan mode. Ask permissions and Auto are not available for cloud sessions. For Remote Control sessions running on your local machine, the dropdown offers Ask permissions, Auto accept edits, and Plan mode. You can also set the starting mode when you launch the local host: claude remote-control --permission-mode acceptEdits Permission prompts appear in claude.ai for approval. Permission modes are set through the UI, CLI flags, or settings files. Telling Claude “stop asking for permission” in the chat does not change the mode. See Permissions for how modes interact with allow, ask, and deny rules. ​ Available modes Each mode makes a different tradeoff between convenience and oversight. Pick the one that matches your task. Mode What Claude can do without asking Best for default Read files Getting started, sensitive work acceptEdits Read and edit files Iterating on code you’re reviewing plan Read files Exploring a codebase, planning a refactor auto All actions, with background safety checks Long-running tasks, reducing prompt fatigue bypassPermissions All actions, no checks Isolated containers and VMs only dontAsk Only pre-approved tools Locked-down environments ​ Analyze before you edit with plan mode Plan mode tells Claude to research and propose changes without making them. Claude reads files, runs shell commands to explore, asks clarifying questions, and writes a plan file, but does not edit your source code. Permission prompts work the same as default mode: you still approve Bash commands, network requests, and other actions that would normally prompt. ​ When to use plan mode Plan mode is useful when you want Claude to research and propose an approach before making changes: Multi-step implementation : when a feature requires edits across many files Code exploration : when you want to research the codebase before changing anything Interactive development : when you want to iterate on the direction with Claude ​ Start and use plan mode Enter plan mode for a single request by prefixing your prompt with /plan , or switch the whole session into plan mode by pressing Shift+Tab to cycle through permission modes . You can also start in plan mode from the CLI: claude --permission-mode plan This example starts a planning session for a complex refactor: I need to refactor our authentication system to use OAuth2. Create a detailed migration plan. Claude analyzes the current implementation and creates a plan. Refine with follow-ups: What about backward compatibility? How should we handle database migration? When the plan is ready, Claude presents it and asks how to proceed. From that prompt you can: Approve and start in auto mode Approve and accept edits Approve and manually review each edit Keep planning, which sends your feedback back to Claude for another round Each approve option also offers to clear the planning context first. ​ Eliminate prompts with auto mode Auto mode is available on Team, Enterprise, and API plans. On Team and Enterprise, an admin must enable it in Claude Code admin settings before users can turn it on. It requires Claude Sonnet 4.6 or Claude Opus 4.6, and is not available on Haiku, claude-3 models, or third-party providers (Bedrock, Vertex, Foundry). Auto mode lets Claude execute actions without showing permission prompts. Before each action runs, a separate classifier model reviews the conversation and decides whether the action matches what you asked for. It blocks actions that escalate beyond the task scope, target infrastructure the classifier doesn’t recognize as trusted, or appear to be driven by prompt injection: hostile instructions embedded in a file, web page, or tool result that attempt to redirect Claude toward actions you never asked for. The defense is layered: a server-side probe scans incoming tool results and flags suspicious content before Claude reads it, while the classifier itself is never shown tool results, so injected instructions cannot influence its approval decisions. For a deeper look at how these layers work together, see the auto mode announcement and the engineering deep dive . Auto mode is a research preview. It reduces prompts but does not guarantee safety. It provides more protection than bypassPermissions but is not as thorough as manually reviewing each action. Use it for tasks where you trust the general direction, not as a replacement for review on sensitive operations. Model : the classifier runs on Claude Sonnet 4.6, even if your main session uses a different model. Cost : classifier calls count toward your token usage the same as main-session calls. Each checked action sends a portion of the conversation transcript plus the pending action to the classifier. The extra cost comes mainly from shell commands and network operations, since read-only actions and file edits in your working directory don’t trigger a classifier call. Latency : each classifier check adds a round-trip before the action executes. ​ How actions are evaluated Each action goes through a fixed decision order. The first matching step wins: Actions matching your allow or deny rules resolve immediately Read-only actions and file edits in your working directory are auto-approved Everything else goes to the classifier If the classifier blocks, Claude receives the reason and attempts an alternative approach On entering auto mode, Claude Code drops any allow rule that is known to grant arbitrary code execution: blanket shell access like Bash(*) , wildcarded script interpreters like Bash(python*) or Bash(node*) , package-manager run commands, and any Agent allow rule. These rules would auto-approve the commands and subagent delegations most capable of causing damage before the classifier ever sees them. Narrow rules like Bash(npm test) carry over. The dropped rules are restored when you leave auto mode. The classifier receives user messages and tool calls as input, with Claude’s own text and tool results stripped out. It also receives your CLAUDE.md content, so actions described in your project instructions are factored into allow and block decisions. Because tool results never reach the classifier, hostile content in a file or web page cannot manipulate it directly. The classifier evaluates the pending action against a customizable set of block and allow rules, checking whether the action is an overeager escalation beyond what you asked for, a mistake about what’s safe to touch, or a sudden departure from your stated intent that suggests Claude may have been steered by something it read. Unlike your permission rules, which match tool names and argument patterns, the classifier reads prose descriptions of what to block and allow: it reasons about the action in context rather than matching syntax. ​ How auto mode handles subagents When Claude spawns a subagent , the classifier evaluates the delegated task before the subagent starts. A task description that looks dangerous on its own, like “delete all remote branches matching this pattern”, is blocked at spawn time. Inside the subagent, auto mode runs with the same block and allow rules as the parent session. Any permissionMode the subagent defines in its own frontmatter is ignored. The subagent’s own tool calls go through the classifier independently. When the subagent finishes, the classifier reviews its full action history. A subagent that was benign at spawn could have been compromised mid-run by content it read. If the return check flags a concern, a security warning is prepended to the subagent’s results so the main agent can decide how to proceed. ​ What the classifier blocks by default Out of the box, the classifier trusts your working directory and, if you’re in a git repo, that repo’s configured remotes. Everything else is treated as external: your company’s source control orgs, cloud buckets, and internal services are unknown until you tell the classifier about them. Blocked by default : Downloading and executing code, like curl | bash or scripts from cloned repos Sending sensitive data to external endpoints Production deploys and migrations Mass deletion on cloud storage Granting IAM or repo permissions Modifying shared infrastructure Irreversibly destroying files that existed before the session started Destructive source control operations like force push or pushing directly to main Allowed by default : Local file operations in your working directory Installing dependencies already declared in your lock files or manifests Reading .env and sending credentials to their matching API Read-only HTTP requests Pushing to the branch you started on or one Claude created To see the full default rule lists as the classifier receives them, run claude auto-mode defaults . If auto mode blocks something routine for your team, like pushing to your own org’s repo or writing to a company bucket, it’s because the classifier doesn’t know those are trusted. Administrators can add trusted repos, buckets, and internal services via the autoMode.environment setting: see Configure the auto mode classifier for the full configuration guide. ​ When auto mode falls back The fallback design keeps false positives from derailing a session: a mistaken block costs Claude a retry, not your progress. If the classifier blocks an action 3 times in a row or 20 times total in one session, auto mode pauses and Claude Code resumes prompting for each action. These thresholds are not configurable. CLI : you see a notification in the status area. Approving the prompted action resets the denial counters, so you can continue in auto mode Non-interactive mode with the -p flag: aborts the session, since there is no user to prompt Repeated blocks usually mean one of two things: the task genuinely requires actions the classifier is built to stop, or the classifier is missing context about your trusted infrastructure and treating safe actions as risky. If the blocks look like false positives, or if the classifier misses something it should have caught, use /feedback to report it. If blocks are happening because the classifier doesn’t recognize your repos or services as trusted, have an administrator configure trusted infrastructure in managed settings. ​ Allow only pre-approved tools with dontAsk mode dontAsk mode auto-denies every tool that is not explicitly allowed. Only actions matching your /permissions allow rules or permissions.allow settings can execute. If a tool has an explicit ask rule, the action is also denied rather than prompting. This makes the mode fully non-interactive, suitable for CI pipelines or restricted environments where you pre-define exactly what Claude is permitted to do. claude --permission-mode dontAsk ​ Skip all checks with bypassPermissions mode bypassPermissions mode disables permission prompts and safety checks. Tool calls execute immediately, except for writes to .git , .vscode , and .idea , which still prompt to prevent accidental corruption of repository state and local configuration. Writes to .claude also prompt, except for .claude/commands , .claude/agents , and .claude/skills where Claude routinely creates skills, subagents, and commands. Only use this mode in isolated environments like containers, VMs, or devcontainers without internet access, where Claude Code cannot cause damage to your host system. claude --permission-mode bypassPermissions The --dangerously-skip-permissions flag is equivalent to --permission-mode bypassPermissions : claude -p "refactor the auth module" --dangerously-skip-permissions bypassPermissions mode offers no protection against prompt injection or unintended actions. For a safer alternative that still maintains background safety checks, use auto mode . Administrators can block this mode by setting permissions.disableBypassPermissionsMode to "disable" in managed settings . ​ Compare permission approaches The table below summarizes the key differences in how each mode handles approvals. plan is omitted since it restricts what Claude can do rather than how approvals work. default acceptEdits auto dontAsk bypassPermissions Permission prompts File edits and commands Commands only None unless fallback triggers None, blocked unless pre-allowed None Safety checks You review each action You review commands Classifier reviews commands Your pre-approved rules only None Token usage Standard Standard Higher, from classifier calls Standard Standard ​ Customize permissions further Permission modes set the baseline approval behavior. For control over individual tools or commands, layer additional configuration on top of the active mode. Permission rules are the first stop. Add allow , ask , or deny entries to your settings file to pre-approve safe commands, force a prompt for risky ones, or block specific tools entirely. Rules apply in every mode except bypassPermissions , which skips the permission layer entirely, and are matched by tool name and argument pattern. See Manage permissions for syntax and examples. Hooks cover logic that pattern-matching rules can’t express. A PreToolUse hook runs before every tool call and can allow, deny, or escalate based on command content, file paths, time of day, or a response from an external policy service. A PermissionRequest hook intercepts the permission dialog itself and answers on your behalf. See Hooks for configuration. ​ See also Permissions : permission rules, syntax, managed policies Hooks : custom permission logic, lifecycle scripting Security : security safeguards and best practices Sandboxing : filesystem and network isolation for Bash commands Non-interactive mode : run Claude Code programmatically with the -p flag Was this page helpful? Yes No Store instructions and memories Common workflows ⌘ I Assistant Responses are generated using AI and may contain mistakes.
