Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert {{ message }} langgenius / dify Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 21.1k Star 135k Invalidate tool provider cache after MCP authentication to ensure list API returns updated data #29971 New issue Copy link New issue Copy link Closed #29972 Closed Invalidate tool provider cache after MCP authentication to ensure list API returns updated data #29971 #29972 Copy link Assignees Labels 🐞 bug Something isn't working Something isn't working Description Nov1c444 opened on Dec 22, 2025 Issue body actions Self Checks I have read the Contributing Guide and Language Policy . This is only for bug report, if you would like to ask a question, please head to Discussions . I have searched for existing issues search for existing issues , including closed ones. I confirm that I am using English to submit this report, otherwise it will be closed. 【中文用户 & Non English User】请使用英语提交，否则会被关闭 ：） Please do not modify this template :) and fill in all the required fields. Dify version 1.11.1 Cloud or Self Hosted Cloud Steps to reproduce After completing MCP tool provider authentication via the /workspaces/current/tool-provider/mcp/auth endpoint, the tool_providers list API continues to return stale data from Redis cache. This causes the UI to show outdated authentication status (e.g., showing "not authenticated" even after successful auth). create Linear MCP Server auth the Server ✔️ Expected Behavior The server is authenticated, all tools from the server can be listed. ❌ Actual Behavior The server is unauthenticated, no tools are available. Reactions are currently unavailable Metadata Metadata Assignees Nov1c444 Labels 🐞 bug Something isn't working Something isn't working Type No type Projects No projects Milestone No milestone Relationships None yet Development No branches or pull requests Issue actions You can’t perform that action at this time.
