Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert {{ message }} anthropics / claude-code Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 11.1k Star 90.5k PermissionRequest hook with type: 'agent' not triggering #23370 New issue Copy link New issue Copy link Closed as duplicate Closed as duplicate PermissionRequest hook with type: 'agent' not triggering #23370 Copy link Labels duplicate This issue or pull request already exists This issue or pull request already exists Description DeanFromLondon opened on Feb 5, 2026 Issue body actions Bug Description The PermissionRequest hook with type: "agent" is configured correctly but does not trigger. Instead of the agent evaluating the command, the standard Claude Code permission dialog appears. Expected Behavior When a Bash command needs permission and matches the hook matcher: The hook should intercept the permission request Show the configured statusMessage ("Gatekeeper review...") The agent should evaluate the command using the provided prompt Auto-approve ( {"ok": true} ) or auto-block ( {"ok": false, "reason": "..."} ) Actual Behavior The hook is completely bypassed. The standard permission dialog appears asking "Do you want to proceed?" with Yes/No options. Configuration { "hooks" : { "PermissionRequest" : [ { "matcher" : " Bash " , "hooks" : [ { "type" : " agent " , "prompt" : " You are a permissions gatekeeper for Claude Code Bash commands...[full prompt with classification rules]... " , "model" : " opus " , "timeout" : 30 , "statusMessage" : " Gatekeeper review... " } ] } ] } } Steps to Reproduce Add the above hook configuration to ~/.claude/settings.json Restart Claude Code Try a risky command like git reset --hard HEAD~1 or git clean -fd Observe: Standard permission dialog appears instead of gatekeeper evaluation Additional Context The agent works when invoked manually : Using the Task tool to invoke the same gatekeeper agent with the same prompt works correctly - it properly classifies commands as SAFE or RISKY Other hook types work : type: "command" hooks for Stop and SessionStart events trigger correctly Commands in permissions.allow bypass the hook entirely (expected behavior) Commands NOT in allow list should trigger the hook but don't Environment Claude Code version: Latest OS: macOS Darwin 25.2.0 Shell: zsh Reference This feature was documented by Boris in the Claude Permissions Gatekeeper pattern, which describes using an Opus agent to evaluate Bash commands for safety before auto-approval in acceptEdits or bypassPermissions modes. Workaround Attempted Tried using type: "command" with a shell script instead, but this requires a way to invoke the Claude agent from the shell, which isn't straightforward. Questions Is type: "agent" actually supported for PermissionRequest hooks? If so, what is the correct configuration format? Are there any additional requirements for agent-type hooks to work with PermissionRequest? Reactions are currently unavailable Metadata Metadata Assignees No one assigned Labels duplicate This issue or pull request already exists This issue or pull request already exists Type No type Projects No projects Milestone No milestone Relationships None yet Development No branches or pull requests Issue actions You can’t perform that action at this time.
