Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert {{ message }} google-gemini / gemini-cli Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 12.8k Star 99.7k SDD: Use checkpointing for versioning and restoring #22705 New issue Copy link New issue Copy link Open Task Open SDD: Use checkpointing for versioning and restoring #22705 Task Copy link Labels area/agent Issues related to Core Agent, Tools, Memory, Sub-Agents, Hooks, Agent Quality Issues related to Core Agent, Tools, Memory, Sub-Agents, Hooks, Agent Quality area/core Issues related to User Interface, OS Support, Core Functionality Issues related to User Interface, OS Support, Core Functionality workstream-rollup Label used to tag epics and features that are associated with one of the three primary workstreams Label used to tag epics and features that are associated with one of the three primary workstreams 🔒 maintainer only ⛔ Do not contribute. Internal roadmap item. ⛔ Do not contribute. Internal roadmap item. Description jerop opened on Mar 16, 2026 Issue body actions Conductor currently associates commits with completed tasks in a spec’s plan.md . We will migrate to use checkpointing in Gemini CLI to keep track of these commits and link them in tasks schema. These checkpoints are snapshots of the project stored in a special shadow git repository at ~/.gemini/history/<project_hash> . Checkpointing will be turned on by default when spec workflow is enabled to ensure a viable version control system that does not rely on the agent to manually update progress. To revert a task, users can rely on the native /restore command, replacing the logic in /spec revert . Reactions are currently unavailable Metadata Metadata Assignees No one assigned Labels area/agent Issues related to Core Agent, Tools, Memory, Sub-Agents, Hooks, Agent Quality Issues related to Core Agent, Tools, Memory, Sub-Agents, Hooks, Agent Quality area/core Issues related to User Interface, OS Support, Core Functionality Issues related to User Interface, OS Support, Core Functionality workstream-rollup Label used to tag epics and features that are associated with one of the three primary workstreams Label used to tag epics and features that are associated with one of the three primary workstreams 🔒 maintainer only ⛔ Do not contribute. Internal roadmap item. ⛔ Do not contribute. Internal roadmap item. Type Task Projects Gemini CLI Public Roadmap Status No status Show more project fields Milestone No milestone Relationships None yet Development No branches or pull requests Issue actions You can’t perform that action at this time.
