Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert {{ message }} openai / codex Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 9.6k Star 69.9k Add ability to update/migrate thread references when projects are moved to new locations #11022 New issue Copy link New issue Copy link Open Open Add ability to update/migrate thread references when projects are moved to new locations #11022 Copy link Labels app Issues related to the Codex desktop app Issues related to the Codex desktop app enhancement New feature or request New feature or request Description becerra-alberto opened on Feb 7, 2026 Issue body actions What variant of Codex are you using? Codex App What feature would you like to see? Problem Currently, when a project folder is moved to a new location, all existing conversation threads associated with that project become inaccessible. The Codex App displays the error message "This project folder was deleted or moved" because the thread references are hardcoded to the original file path. This is a common workflow - users frequently reorganize their project folders. As noted by the Codex team (issue #11019 ), threads are stored in an internal database with absolute file path references, making them vulnerable to breakage on relocation. Proposed Solution Add a feature that allows users to update or migrate thread references when a project has been moved . Some possible implementations: Option 1: Automatic Detection & Migration When opening Codex App, detect if a previously-indexed project has been moved and automatically offer to update the thread references to the new location. Option 2: Manual Path Update Dialog Add a "Project Path Changed" dialog that appears when a broken project is accessed, allowing users to: Browse to the project's new location Confirm the update Migrate all associated threads to point to the new path Option 3: Project Settings UI Add a new "Update Project Location" option in the project context menu or settings that allows users to manually specify the project's new path and re-establish thread connections. Benefit This would prevent users from losing valuable conversation history when they reorganize their projects, which is a natural part of development workflow. Additional information Related Issue This feature request is related to issue #11019 , where the Codex team confirmed that threads are associated with the absolute file path of a project. They suggested that "a way to update existing threads to point at a new location after you move your project" would be a good solution. Use Case Example User has projects in ~/Desktop/Projects/ User creates multiple conversation threads in Codex App for these projects User moves the folder to ~/Projects/ (using Finder, terminal, etc.) User opens Codex App to access those threads Current behavior : Threads show "This project folder was deleted or moved" and are inaccessible Desired behavior : Codex detects the issue and helps user recover the threads by updating the project path This is especially important for users on the free tier who may not have other conversation history preserved. Reactions are currently unavailable Metadata Metadata Assignees No one assigned Labels app Issues related to the Codex desktop app Issues related to the Codex desktop app enhancement New feature or request New feature or request Type No type Projects No projects Milestone No milestone Relationships None yet Development No branches or pull requests Issue actions You can’t perform that action at this time.
