--- PAGE 1 ---
Recursive Language Models Meet Uncertainty: The Surprising
Effectiveness of Self-Reflective Program Search for Long Context
Keivan Alizadeh ∗ Parshin Shojaee ∗ Minsik Cho Mehrdad Farajtabar
Apple
Abstract
Long-context handling remains a core challenge for language models: even with extended
context windows, models often fail to reliably extract, reason over, and use the information
across long contexts. Recent works like Recursive Language Models (RLMs) have approached
this challenge by agentic way of decomposing long contexts into recursive sub-queries through
programmatic interaction at inference. While promising, the success of RLMs critically depends
on how these trajectories of context-interaction programs are selected, which has remained
unexplored. In this paper, we study this problem and introduce Self-Reflective Program Search
for Long Context (SRLM), a framework that augments programming-based context interaction
with uncertainty-aware self-reflection.SRLM leverages three intrinsic signals: self consistency,
reasoning trace length, and verbalized confidence. These serve as complementary indicators of
a model’s internal uncertainty, and the model uses them to evaluate and compare candidate
context-interaction programs. Extensive experiments across diverse benchmark datasets, context
lengths, and backbone models, show that SRLM consistently outperforms state-of-the-art base-
lines, yielding up to 22% improvement over RLMs under the same time budget. Our findings show
that recursion itself is not the primary driver of performance in RLMs, and a simple self-reflective
program search can match or surpass RLM without requiring self-query or explicit recursion
mechanisms. We find that for context lengths within the model’s context window, RLMs with
recursion often degrade performance relative to the base model, whereas SRLM yields consistent
and robust gains across both short and long contexts. We also find that RLM is less effective
in tasks with semantically intensive nature, where heuristic program search is insufficient and
broader contextual understanding is required, while self-reflection inSRLM provides a semantic
signal that better steers reasoning in these challenging long-context scenarios.
1 Introduction
Large language models are increasingly deployed in settings where long-context understanding is not
optional but unavoidable. Modern applications from deep research agents [27] and web browsing
systems [10] to coding assistants [31] and self-improving agents [78] routinely demand reasoning over
hundreds of thousands to millions of tokens spanning documents, logs, repositories, and interaction
histories. Despite rapid progress in extending models’ context windows, effective utilization of long
contexts still remains challenging. Empirical studies show that even in frontier models with very
large context windows, performance degrades with context length in ways that are well-documented
but not yet solved: models lose track of salient details, fail to reliably extract, integrate, and
∗Equal contribution.
Correspondence to {pshojaee, kalizadehvahid, farajtabar}@apple.com
1
arXiv:2603.15653v1  [cs.CL]  7 Mar 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Figure 1:Overview of SRLM, a framework that augments programmatic context interaction
reasoning with uncertainty-aware self-reflection. The language model operates in a self-query
execution programming environment where the context is externalized as a variable, and generates
programs that query and interact with context. Meanwhile, three complementary uncertainty
signals (self-consistency, reasoning trace length, and verbalized confidence) are used to guide
self-reflective programming trajectory selection without external supervision, enabling more robust
and semantically grounded long-context reasoning.
reason over relevant information across distant positions, and are easily distracted by irrelevant
content [40, 24, 15].
The research community has approached this challenge from several angles. One direction has
been to target this problem at the model level for example through architecture sparsity mecha-
nisms [57, 21, 36], state-space models [22, 12, 61], retrieval-based hybrid models [32, 62], or KV cache
compression [18], reducing the effective cost of processing long sequences. Another direction has been
at the data and training level where models are specifically trained on longer sequences or curating
corpora that reward reasoning over long-horizons [20, 80]. A more recent promising direction treats
long-context reasoning as a search problem at inference-time, leaving the model unchanged and
instead restructuring how it interacts with context [66, 78]. Chunking and summarization pipelines
break long contexts into manageable pieces; retrieval systems surface relevant passages on demand;
and agent-style frameworks issue iterative queries over the context, building up answers through a
sequence of focused interactions.
Recursive Language Models (RLMs) [75] represent the current state of the art in this inference-time
context handling paradigm. Instead of processing long context with millions of tokens directly with
model, RLM treats the context as an external variable within a programming environment, and
allows the model to generate programs that query, slice, and recursively interact with the context.
By externalizing context interaction with program execution, RLM has shown to extend the model’s
effective reasoning horizon beyond what prompting typically allows.
However, this framing introduces a largely unexplored dimension of the problem. The quality of long-
context reasoning in RLM is governed not only by the model’s capacity to process extended context,
but also by the mechanism used to select trajectories of context-interaction programs. At each step,
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
the model must decide which context segment to inspect, how to formulate intermediate self-queries,
what sub-questions to pose, and how to aggregate these programming steps and partial results.
The final prediction is therefore highly sensitive to the specific program trajectory instantiated
during context interaction reasoning. Despite this, RLM currently predominantly rely on fixed
recursion schemes, lacking a principled mechanism for evaluating and selecting among alternative
reasoning trajectories. This raises a central question:Is recursion itself the key ingredient for
long-context reasoning, or is the real bottleneck how we select among candidate interaction programs
under uncertainty?
In this work, we investigate this question and introduce Self-Reflective Program Search for Long
Context Method (SRLM), a framework that augments programming-based context interaction
with uncertainty-aware self-reflection (Figure 1).SRLM leverages three complementary signals
(self-consistency, reasoning length, and verbalized confidence) as proxies for the model’s internal
uncertainty, enabling principled comparison of context-interaction trajectories through model’s
self-reflection without requiring external supervision. Through extensive comparison experiments
across diverse benchmarks, varying context lengths, and multiple backbone models, we observe that
SRLM consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, yielding up to 22% improvement over
RLM under the same wall-clock time budget.
Beyond empirical improvements, our analysis provides several insights into programming-based
context-interaction frameworks like RLM and its key components. First, we find that recursion
is not the primary driver of performance. A simple self-reflective program search can match or
even surpass RLM without relying on explicit recursion or self-query mechanisms. Second, the
recursive self-query procedure is often more sensitive to context-length variations than self-reflection.
In particular, when the context length falls within the model’s native context window, recursive
RLM reasoning can degrade performance relative to the base model, whereasSRLM yields more
robust and consistent improvements across both short and long contexts. Finally, we observe that
RLM is less effective on semantically intensive tasks where heuristic program search is insufficient.
In such settings, the uncertainty-aware self-reflection mechanism inSRLM provides a higher-level
semantic signal that more effectively steers reasoning. Together, these findings reposition recursion
as one component of long-context reasoning rather than its defining feature, and suggest that
uncertainty-aware self-reflection may serve as a simple yet effective alternative for building robust
context-interaction frameworks.
More broadly, our goal in this paper is not just introducing a novel method but to better understand
programming-based context-interaction frameworks and the role of their core components. Our study
highlights the critical importance of programming trajectory selection in long-context interaction
and suggests that improving how models explore and evaluate candidate interaction programs may
be as important as extending context length itself. We hope that these findings help guide the
development of richer and more reliable long-context reasoning frameworks in future work.
Our key contributions are as follows:
• We introduceSRLM, a simple framework for long-context reasoning that augments programming-
based context interaction with uncertainty-aware self-reflection.SRLM exploits three complemen-
tary uncertainty signals (self-consistency, reasoning trace length, and verbalized confidence) to
enable principled comparison and selection of context-interaction programming trajectories.
• We demonstrate that across diverse benchmarks, and multiple backbone models,SRLM consis-
tently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving up to a 22% improvement over RLM under
the same wall-clock time budget.
• We uncover that recursion is not the primary driver of RLM’s performance, and a simple self-
reflective program search can match or surpass recursion without the explicit self-query mechanism.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
• We find that RLM’s recursive procedure is sensitive to context length, mostly performing worse
than the base model within the model’s native context window, whereasSRLM delivers more
robust improvements across both short and long contexts.
• We identify a systematic failure mode of RLM on semantically intensive tasks and show that
self-reflection provides a richer steering signal than heuristic-based recursive program search in
these settings.
2 Methodology
2.1 Problem Formulation
Let q denote a natural language query andC = (c1, c2, . . . , cN)a long context of N tokens, where
N≫L with L being the model’s effective context window. Rather than feedingC directly to model,
we follow [75] and treat context as anexternal variableaccessible within a sandboxed execution
programming environment. A context-interaction programp = (p1, p2, . . . , pT )is a sequence of T
executable operations, e.g., slicing, querying, or aggregating overC, each generated autoregressively
and executed in the REPL, producing an intermediate execution state:et = Exec(pt, e t−1,C ),
where e0 = ∅. The terminal step yields the program outputout(p) ∈ A over answer spaceA. A
key distinction from [75] is thatSRLM doesnotrequire programs to instantiate explicit self-query
sub-calls or recursive model invocations as tool calls. This decouples quality of context interaction
from the structure of recursion, and shifts the focus of long-context reasoning improvement to the
selection mechanism over candidate context-interaction program trajectories.
2.2 SRLM: Self-Reflective Program Search for Long Context
Given query q and context C, K candidate programs are independently selected from the model
policy πθ: p(k) ∼π θ(· |q,C ), k = 1, . . . , K.Each p(k) constitutes a distinct reasoning trajectory
over C, differing in which context segments are inspected, how sub-problems are decomposed, and
the confidence with which intermediate conclusions are drawn. We propose a self-reflective program
search approach for long-context reasoning that draws on three complementary uncertainty signals:
sampling-based uncertainty (self-consistency),semantic uncertainty (verbalized confidence), and
behavioral uncertainty (reasoning trace length). Notably, all these three signals are derived from the
model’s own generation process, requiring no verifier, reward model, or external labeled data.
2.2.1 Uncertainty Signals
Sampling-based Uncertainty (Self-Consistency).As per [58], a natural first-order uncertainty
quantification arises directly from the sampling distribution over programs. GivenK independent
draws from πθ, the empirical frequency of any candidate answera∈ A serves as an estimate
of the model’s marginal confidence in that answer, i.e.,prob(a) = 1
K
PK
k=1 1

out(p(k)) = a

≈
Pπθ

out(p) = a|q,C

. The plurality answers ˆa= arg maxa∈A prob(a)maximize this empirical
confidence, and we retain the consistent candidate set as the subset of programs that agree with
ˆa: S =

p(k) ∈ P : out(p(k)) = ˆa

⊆ P . This step performs implicit verification through self-
consistency [64], however, self-consistency is a coarse uncertainty signal that operates only at
the level of final outputs and is insensitive to the quality of the trajectory that produced them.
Programs in S may share the same answerˆa, yet may differ substantially in how they arrived at it:
which context segments they inspected, how confidently they resolved each sub-problem, and how
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
much deliberation they required. Selecting reliably among these candidates demands finer-grained
uncertainty measures.
Semantic Uncertainty (Verbalized Confidence).Inspired by [ 68], to obtain a step-level
semantic uncertainty signal, we elicit the model’s own assessment of its confidence at each intermediate
generation step t. Specifically, we append a structured instruction to the model’s prompt, requiring
it to report a confidence score for each step in a standardized format{"confidence":ν (k)
t }, ν (k)
t ∈
(0, 100],where the model is instructed to be precise and nuanced in its self-assessment. This elicitation
yields a per-step confidenceν(k)
t reflecting the model’s self-assessed certainty over its intermediate
conclusion at stept [68]. Normalizing to the unit interval and aggregating in log-space over the full
trace, we define the verbalized confidence score of programp(k) as VC(p(k)) =PT (k)
t=1 log

ν(k)
t /100

≤
0, where non-positivity follows fromν(k)
t /100 ∈ (0, 1], and values closer to zero indicate globally
higher confidence across the trajectory. Unlike self-consistency,VC(p(k))is a semantic uncertainty
measure that captures how the model endorses each intermediate reasoning step as it progressively
builds toward the final answer. For more details of prompt used for this, check Appendix B.1.
Behavioral Uncertainty (Reasoning Length).While verbalized confidence relies on the model’s
explicit self-report at each step, we additionally exploit an implicit behavioral signal as the total
token length of the generated trace. Letℓ(k)
t denote the number of reasoning and output tokens
at step t; we define Len(p(k)) = PT (k)
t=1 ℓ(k)
t . We interpret this quantity as a proxy for epistemic
effort. Intuitively, when a model is uncertain, it tends to generate longer, more deliberative traces,
whereas confident and well-grounded reasoning is often associated with more concise outputs [13, 54].
Importantly, trace length provides a signal complementary to verbalized confidence [13]. Unlike
self-reported confidence scores, it requires no explicit elicitation and is derived solely from observable
generation statistics. As such, it offers an alternative fine-grained window into internal uncertainty
that is not directly subject to miscalibration in the model’s stated confidence.
2.2.2 Joint Uncertainty-guided Selection
The three uncertainty signals (self-consistency, verbalized confidence, and trace length) are comple-
mentary proxies of model uncertainty, each capturing a distinct aspect of the model’s internal state.
As our empirical results demonstrate (Section 3.8), combining these signals yields a richer uncertainty
characterization that more effectively guides program search over long-context interaction programs
than any individual signal alone. Within the consistent candidate setS (where self-consistency
has already been enforced), we unify the remaining two signals into a joint uncertainty score of
s(p) = VC(p) ·Len (p)where lower values of s(p)indicate better candidates. By construction,
s(p) ≤ 0since VC(p) ≤ 0and Len(p) > 0. Intuitively, this score penalizes programs that express low
confidence or require excessively long reasoning traces—both indicators of uncertainty. The optimal
program is then selected asp∗ = arg maxp∈S s(p), with final predictionˆy= out(p∗). Together, these
three uncertainty signals form a coherent, self-reflective framework that effectively guides program
search in SRLM without requiring any external supervision.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
3 Experiments
3.1 Datasets
Following [75], we evaluateSRLM on three benchmarks spanning diverse long-context reasoning
tasks.BrowseComp+ (1K)[ 10] is a multi-hop QA benchmark for DeepResearch [48] over a
verified offline corpus of 1,000 documents, where each question requires piecing together evidence
across multiple documents. Following [75, 56], we evaluate on 150 randomly sampled instances
and report accuracy.OOLONG (131K)[ 6] requires transformation and aggregation of input
chunks, scaling linearly in processing complexity with context length. We focus on thetrec_coarse
split from OOLONG synthetic benchmark with context length131K (50 tasks), and report scores
following the original paper.LongBench-v2 CodeQA[ 3] is a multiple-choice code repository
understanding benchmark requiring reasoning over long-context of files in a codebase (50 tasks).
Beyond this, we conduct extended evaluations targeting the core research questions of this study.
To characterize how context length affectsSRLM and RLM, we evaluate on thefull OOLONG
synthetic benchmark(trec_coarse split) across context lengths from1K to4M tokens (≈650
tasks, 50 per length). To investigate the effect of task semantics and extend evaluation to tasks that
by nature require more semantic understanding rather than heuristic search over context, we also
evaluate on thefull LongBench-v2benchmark across all domain categories beyond just CodeQA
(≈500tasks), including domains like single document QA, multi-document QA, long in-context
learning, etc. For more details on statistics, context length distributions, and category breakdowns
of these datasets, check Appendix A.
3.2 Baselines
We compare against a comprehensive set of task-agnostic inference-time baselines following [75].
Base LLMprocesses the full context in prompt without any programmatic inference scaffolding.
CodeAct (+BM25)[63] is a code-executing ReAct [71] agent that receives the full context directly
and is additionally equipped with a BM25 retriever [51] for context search as per [75, 30, 10].
CodeAct (+sub-calls)ablates the effect of context offloading as a variable in REPL by augmenting
the CodeAct baseline with the ability to invoke sub-calls from the language model.Summary agent
also follows [56, 66, 73] and iteratively compacts and summarizes context as the model window fills,
chunking documents that exceed the context limit.RLM[75] is the current state-of-the-art approach,
externalizing context as a variable in a REPL environment and issuing recursive self-queries; we
consider both the recursive variant (depth one) and theno sub-callsvariant that disables this
self-query procedure. For each comparison across baseline methods, we use the same backbone
models and sampling parameters.
3.3 Experimental Setup
In our experiments, we use two backbone LLMs: the open-weight Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B [59] and
GPT-5 [55] with medium reasoning effort, with GPT-5-mini as the sub-model for the recursive calls
(as per [75]). SRLM operates in the same REPL environment as RLM and usesK=8candidate
trajectories for uncertainty-guided program search, with uncertainty signals defined in Section 2.
To ensure fair wall-clock time comparison across methods, we impose execution time limits of 600
seconds per each step of trajectory for all runs. We set a maximum of 30 program interaction
steps and a maximum generation length of 260K tokens for Qwen3-Coder-480B, with default API
parameters for GPT-5 and GPT-5-mini calls. For verbalized confidence elicitation, we augment the
original RLM prompt (As in [75]) with a suffix requesting the self-report of internal confidence in
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Table 1: Performance comparison ofSRLM against baselines on long-context benchmarks from [75].
Results report accuracy (%) on LongBench-v2 CodeQA, BrowseComp+ (1K documents), and
OOLONG (131K tokens). SRLM consistently outperforms all baselines, achieving up to 22%
improvement over RLM.∗ indicates context overflow;† indicates our replication of results; and
boldshows best result per LLM backbone.
Model LongBench-v2 (CodeQA) BrowseComp+(1K) OOLONG (131K)
Task LengthN(tokens) 23K-4.2M 6M-11M 131K
Qwen3-Coder-480B
Base Model20.0 ∗ 0.0∗ 36.0
CodeAct (+ BM25)24.0 ∗ 12.7 38.0
CodeAct (+ sub-calls)26.0 ∗ 0.0 32.0
Summary agent50.0 38.0 44.1
RLM 59.8† 37.1† 45.7†
RLM (no sub-calls) 53.8† 36.3† 39.1†
SRLM 64.9(↑5.1) 59.7(↑22.6) 51.8(↑6.1)
SRLM (no sub-calls) 59.0(↑5.2) 50.1(↑13.8) 45.9(↑6.8)
GPT-5
Base Model24.0 ∗ 0.0∗ 44.0
CodeAct (+ BM25)22.0 ∗ 51.0 38.0
CodeAct (+ sub-calls)24.0 ∗ 0.0∗ 40.0
Summary agent58.0 70.5 46.0
RLM 59.5† 86.0† 53.0†
RLM (no sub-calls) 65.2† 89.7† 50.5†
SRLM 68.9(↑9.4) 92.4(↑6.4) 65.5(↑12.5)
SRLM (no sub-calls) 74.1(↑8.9) 94.6(↑4.9) 60.7(↑10.2)
a structured format, without modifying any other part of the prompt or reasoning procedure (see
Appendix B.1 for details). For final answer evaluation, we also useGPT-5-mini as a judgeacross all
datasets to robustly assess the correctness (check Appendix B.2 for details).
3.4 Main Results
Table 1 comparesSRLM with RLM and other baselines on the long-context benchmarks from [75].
Across all datasets and both backbone LLMs,SRLM consistently performs the best, improving
over the previous state-of-the-art RLM by up to 22%. Looking more closely, we find that the
effect of recursion is inconsistent across backbone models. For example, with Qwen3-Coder-480B,
recursion helps both RLM andSRLM, suggesting that decomposing the context into smaller sub-
problems through model’s self-query procedure as tool call can support long-context handling in
Qwen backbone. However, under GPT-5, recursion hurts performance and the variants without
sub-calls outperform their recursive counterparts in most cases. This might indicate that when the
backbone model is already strong at long-context reasoning, explicitly using self-query tool calls for
context-interaction may be unnecessary or even disruptive. In contrast, the self-reflection mechanism
in SRLM provides stable improvements across both of these backbones. Even without any sub-calls,
SRLM often outperforms recursive RLM. This suggests that guiding through model internals and
self-reflection may matter more than guiding through explicit recursive tool calls for the scope of
long context. We analyze these behaviors in greater detail in Section 3.5–3.7.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
1K 2K 4K 8K16K32K65K131K262K524K1M2M4M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Base
RLM
RLM (no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM (no sub-call)
0
10
20
30
∆ vs Base (pp)
< 131K  131K
Context Length
-0.9
-6.8
+5.4
-1.6
+11.9+9.5
+28.5
+19.5
RLM
RLM
(no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM
(no sub-call)
OOLONG (GPT-5)
1K 2K 4K 8K16K32K65K131K262K524K1M2M4M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
0
10
20
30
40
∆ vs Base (pp)
< 131K  131K
Context Length
+14.6
-0.8
+25.7
+15.2
+31.6
+26.3
+42.5+44.7
OOLONG (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
10
0
10
20
30
∆ vs Base (pp)
< 131K  131K
Context Length
-6.9 -8.1
-1.3 -1.0
+23.4+24.7
+30.4+29.2
LongBench-v2 (GPT-5)
16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
10
0
10
20
30
∆ vs Base (pp)
< 131K  131K
Context Length
-6.0
-12.0
+3.8+3.1
+23.7+19.9
+36.2+33.4
LongBench-v2 (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
Figure 2: Performance across context lengths on OOLONG and LongBench-v2 Full datasets: Line
plots show accuracy ofSRLM, RLM, and the base LLM across context from thousands to millions of
tokens using GPT-5(left)and Qwen3-Coder-480B(right)backbones. Bar plots show the average
performance gain over the base model, separated into contexts within (<131K) and near/beyond
(≥131K) the native context window.
3.5 Robustness Across Context Lengths
Next, we investigate how context length affects the behavior of each method. To this end, we
run additional experiments on the full LongBench-v2 and OOLONG datasets, covering contexts
from thousand to millions of tokens. Figure 2 comparesSRLM, RLM, and the base LLM across
context lengths. We also demonstrate the performance gap relative to the base model (∆vs. base),
separating results for shorter contexts well within the model’s context window (<131K), and longer
contexts near or beyond the context limit (≥131K). From these results, we observe several interesting
patterns. First, the advantage ofSRLM becomes more pronounced as context length increases. On
longer contexts,SRLM consistently provides better gains over the base model than RLM. Second,
RLM is noticeably more sensitive to context length. On shorter contexts (for example <131K), RLM
often underperforms the base model, indicating that recursive decomposition may not be effective
on all contexts and can introduce unnecessary overhead when the context is already manageable. In
contrast, SRLM remains robust and provides more consistent gains over the base model on both
short and long contexts. For more detailed results over backbones and tasks, check Appendix C.1.
3.6 Is Recursion the Primary Driver of Performance in RLMs?
One of the key motivations and a central question to this study is whether recursion is the main source
of gains in recursive language models (RLMs), particularly in long-context settings. Understanding
this can help toward guiding the design of more effective frameworks. Conceptually, recursion can be
viewed as a form of inference-time scaling through model as a tool use, i.e., the model decomposes
the problem into sub-queries and recursively calls itself as a tool to interact with different parts of
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
the context. In contrast, our self-reflective variant (SRLM without sub-calls) performs inference-time
scaling through model’s internals. Instead of explicitly issuing recursive tool sub-calls, it relies on
implicit uncertainty-guided self-reflection to revise and refine its context-interaction programs. To
study the above research question, we focus on the comparison of context-interaction recursive
programming (RLM with sub-calls) and self-reflective programming (SRLM without sub-calls) on
long-context settings (≥131K tokens) across various datasets and backbones.
10 20
Time (min)
50
60
70
80
90
Accuracy (%)
GPT-5
RLM
SRLM
(no sub-call)
LongBench-v2
OOLONG
BrowseComp+
(1K)
25 50 75 100
Time (min)
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
Accuracy (%)
Qwen3-Coder-480B
Figure 3: Accuracy versus cost pareto compar-
ison of RLM andSRLM (no sub-call) on long-
context settings of benchmarks under GPT-5
(left) and Qwen3-Coder-480B (right).
As shown in Figure 3, self-reflection can actually
outperform recursion in both performance and cost
(wall-clock time) under long-context settings. Notice
that since all the trajectories are executed in parallel,
the wall-clock time ofSRLM doesn’t significantly in-
crease over RLM which runs only one trajectory. This
suggests that recursion may not be the best strategy
for inference-time scaling in long-context interactions,
as explicit self-querying and sub-calls introduce ad-
ditional overhead with only marginal performance
gains. This trend is also reflected in Table 1 results.
In cases where recursion helps, most of the gains
over the base model come from the programmatic
context-interaction procedure rather than recursion.
For example, on LongBench CodeQA with Qwen3-
Coder-480B, performance improves from20to53 .8
with RLM without sub-calls, and only further to59.8
with recursive sub-calls which can be obtained withSRLM without sub-calls as an alternative infer-
ence time scaling method, indicating that recursion contributes only marginal gains in long-context
frameworks.
3.7 Task Semantics and Limits of Recursion
Code Repository
 QA
Single-Doc
 QA
Multi-Doc
 QA
In-Context
Learning
Dialouge
History QA
Structured
Data QA
LongBench-v2 Domains
30
41
52
63
74
47
49
50
52
53
44
45
47
49
51
51
54
57
59
62
61
64
66
69
71
46
54
61
68
75
Base
RLM
RLM
(no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM
(no sub-call)
Figure 4: Comparison ofSRLM, RLM, and
Base LLM across LongBench-v2 domains (av-
eraged across backbone models). In general,
SRLM variants show more consistent gains
on tasks with different semantic nature.
Beyond overall long-context performance, it is im-
portant to examine how recursion and self-reflection
behave across tasks of different natures. The tasks
studied in [75] (including OOLONG, BrowseComp+,
and LongBench-v2 Code Repository QA) are largely
search-oriented. For example, in the LongBench-v2
evaluation, experiments were restricted to the Code
QA category, where answering a question typically re-
quires locating specific information across structured
repository files. These long contexts are modular
and well-organized, making them naturally suitable
for recursive and programmatic traversal. However,
LongBench-v2 covers a much broader set of domains
beyond code QA, including document QA, dialogue
history QA, in-context learning, and others. Many
of these tasks are less about finding relevant pieces
of information and more about understanding and
integrating evidence distributed throughout the entire
context. To better understand the robustness and
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
30
35
40
45
Accuracy (%)
OOLONG
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
50
55
60
LongBench-v2
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
60
65
70
75
BrowseComp+ (1K)
33.1 70.9 78.5 83.2 86.0 88.2 90.5 92.6 94.3 97.5
Verbalized Confidence
5K
11K
19K
27K
33K
37K
41K
44K
50K
75K
Trace Length
36.7 76.0 81.6 84.8 86.4 88.3 90.7 92.9 94.8 97.8
Verbalized Confidence
5K
12K
19K
24K
28K
31K
34K
38K
43K
69K
26.6 61.2 72.6 78.1 81.8 84.4 86.1 88.0 90.7 96.0
Verbalized Confidence
7K
12K
14K
16K
18K
22K
26K
33K
43K
71K
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Figure 5: Results of ablation experiments acrossSRLM’s variants (averaged across backbones and
recursive/nonrecursive runs).Top:Contribution of each uncertainty signal and their combination
in SRLM.Bottom:Complementary effects of semantic and behavioral uncertainty as fine-grained
signals guiding self-reflection in SRLM.
consistency of different methods across diverse long-context tasks, we extend our evaluation to these
additional LongBench-v2 domains.
Figure 4 shows the performance of each method by domain on LongBench-v2 dataset (averaged across
backbones). We observe that the impact of recursion varies substantially with task type. Recursion
is particularly more effective for structured, search-oriented tasks such as Code QA and Structured
Data QA, but less beneficial for more semantically demanding tasks like Dialogue History QA and
Document QA. In contrast, self-reflection inSRLM variants provides more consistent performance
gains across all task categories. By leveraging the model’s internal uncertainty signals, self-reflective
programming offers a stronger semantic steering mechanism for context interaction. This enables it
to adapt more effectively to tasks that require different levels and types of semantic understanding.
3.8 Ablation Study
In this section, we perform ablations on the self-reflection mechanism ofSRLM to understand
the contribution of its components. Figure 5 reports results on OOLONG, LongBench-v2, and
BrowseComp+ (1K) under long-context settings (≥131K tokens), aggregated across model backbones
and runs with and without recursive sub-calls.SRLM leverages three complementary uncertainty
signals during self-reflection: (1) sampling-based self-consistency, (2) semantic uncertainty captured
through verbalized confidence, and (3) behavioral uncertainty measured by the length of the reasoning
trace. The top row of Figure 5 shows the impact of each component. As it can be observed, the
full SRLM configuration consistently outperforms variants using individual signals, indicating that
these uncertainty sources provide complementary benefits. The bottom row of Figure 5 examines
the relation between fine-grained uncertainty metrics (verbalized confidence and reasoning trace
length) and accuracy under bins with same samples. As it can be observed, performance depends
jointly on both signals, and their relation with accuracy is not strictly linear. In other words, high
confidence or short traces alone do not reliably indicate correctness, however, their combination
seem to provide a stronger self-reflection signal in the scope of long-context.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
4 Related Works
Context Window ExpansionA widely adopted approach for handling long contexts in language
models has been to increase the maximum context window through architectural modifications or
training strategies. For example, advancements in positional encoding and attention scaling have
enabled models to process substantially longer inputs [9, 14, 43]. Beyond these techniques, several
architectural directions have been explored to further improve long-context scalability, including
sparsity-based mechanisms [57, 21, 36], state-space models [22, 12, 61], retrieval-augmented fine-
tuning [32, 62], and key–value (KV) cache compression techniques [18]. Collectively, these methods
aim to improve the scalability of language models with respect to input length and enable effective
yet efficient inference over long contexts. Despite these advances, extending the context window
alone does not fully address the challenges of long-context reasoning. Recent empirical studies
show that model performance remains constrained by the effective context length. For example,
LongBench-v2 [3] finds that frontier models with extended context windows still struggle on realistic
long-context multitask benchmarks, achieving only modest improvements once input lengths exceed
certain context thresholds. These results suggest that scaling the context window, while helpful, is
insufficient to guarantee robust reasoning over very large contexts in real-world settings.
Agentic Long-Context Approaches.There has been an alternative line of research to com-
plement earlier long-context handling approaches with inference-time strategies. Recent works
treat long-context as a procedural and agentic problem, leveraging LLMs as tools invoked through
programmatic strategies that iteratively interact with context. For example, Recursive Language
Model (RLM) [75] utilize this idea by treating the context and input prompt as a variable in an
external programming environment that can be decomposed, queried, and recursively processed
through program execution. RLMs show significant benefits over monolithic prompting and con-
text summarization methods on several long-context benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness
of programmatic context interaction. Related approaches include code-execution agents, such as
CodeAct [63] which enable iterative code generation and execution for flexible search over context,
as well as summarization-based agents such as ReSum [66] that periodically compress interaction
histories in agentic web search. There are also existing works on memory-augmented agents that
introduce explicit long-term storage to better extract and retrieve salient information across long
interactions, e.g., Mem0 [11] and G-Memory [77]. While these agentic and programmatic approaches
to long-context tasks show promise, their decisions about what to read, summarize, or revisit
typically rely on surface-level heuristics rather than semantic understanding. Consequently, they
perform better at structurally localized tasks but struggle with semantically dense ones requiring
deep comprehension more than search.
Long-Context Evaluation.A growing body of work in literature has focused on evaluating LLMs
under long-context settings. Benchmarks such as LongBench [4], and its successor LongBench v2 [3]
evaluate realistic tasks involving long documents, dialogues, and codebases, revealing substantial
performance degradation as context length increases. Complementary benchmarks emphasize different
stressors. For example, Single Needle in a Haystack (S-NIAH) [25] tasks test retrieval robustness at
extreme lengths, where most of the context is irrelevant. In contrast, benchmarks like OOLONG [6]
explicitly target long-context reasoning and aggregation, requiring models to process and combine
information across all parts of the long iputs. BrowseComp [65] and BrowseComp-Plus [10] also
further extend the long-context evaluation to agentic and deep-research settings, where models must
persistently navigate, remember, and integrate information across many documents or browsing steps.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Collectively, these benchmarks show that long-context reasoning remains a ubiquitous challenge for
frontier models across a wide range of diverse and practically important tasks.
Confidence Estimation in Large Language Models.Estimating model confidence is an
important component for enabling reliable reasoning and self-correction in language models. A
growing body of work studies how uncertainty signals can be extracted from LLMs without requiring
additional fine-tuning. One line of work leverages multiple samples from the model’s predictive
distribution to estimate uncertainty via agreement across generations, commonly referred to as
sampling-based confidence or self-consistency [64, 35, 42]. In this setting, the empirical frequency
of an answer across sampled outputs provides a natural estimate of the model’s confidence in that
prediction. Another direction investigates the model’s ability to explicitly report its own uncertainty.
Several recent studies evaluate this called as verbalized confidence, where the model is prompted to
provide calibrated confidence scores alongside its predictions [68, 72]. Empirical comparisons suggest
that self-verbalized confidence can serve as a strong and more semantic zero-shot uncertainty estimator
and often outperforms approaches based solely on token probabilities or sampling statistics [58].
Other approaches estimate uncertainty using internal model signals such as token likelihoods [16]
or learned probes over hidden representations [76]. More recently, work in the reasoning literature
has identified behavioral signals in the generation process of recent frontier models that correlate
with model uncertainty. In particular, several studies observe that incorrect reasoning trajectories
tend to be longer and more deliberative than correct ones [44, 5]. This phenomenon suggests that
reasoning trace length can serve as an implicit proxy for epistemic uncertainty [13, 60]. While prior
work has primarily exploited this observation to improve reasoning efficiency or reduce unnecessary
deliberation [50, 23], it also provides a useful signal for identifying reliable reasoning trajectories. Our
work builds on these insights and leverages multiple complementary uncertainty signals, including
sampling-based consistency, verbalized confidence, and behavioral indicators from reasoning lengths,
to guide uncertainty-aware self-reflection during program search for long context interaction.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we study long-context reasoning through the perspective of context-interaction
programming. We introduceSRLM, a self-reflective program search framework that uses intrinsic
uncertainty signals—self-consistency, reasoning trace length, and verbalized confidence—to guide
how models interact with long contexts. Across diverse benchmarks, context lengths, and backbone
models, SRLM consistently improves performance, achieving gains of up to 22% over the prior
state-of-the-art approach RLM. Our analysis further suggests that recursive decomposition alone is
not the main factor behind the performance of Recursive Language Models (RLMs). Instead, the
improvements appear to stem from the external programmatic way of handling context interaction.
When guided by self-reflection, these programs provide a more reliable way for models to navigate
and reason over long contexts. In general,SRLM provides more consistent performance gains than
RLM across most settings. Notably, it improves performance not only in long-context scenarios but
also in shorter contexts within the model’s context window, where RLM has been observed to hurt
performance. SRLM is also more effective than RLM on semantically demanding problems that
require deeper contextual comprehension of the context beyond heuristic program search.
Additionally, in this paper, we have employed a relatively simple form of self-reflection based on
intrinsic uncertainty signals to guide programmatic context interaction. While effective, this design
represents a limitation of our approach and leaves room for future research. Future work could explore
richer forms of intrinsic self-reflection within programmatic context-interaction frameworks beyond
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
explicit recursive sub-calls, as well as designs that integrate decision-making with self-reflective signals
to enable earlier termination of reasoning and improved control over token usage. We hope these
findings highlight the importance of context-interaction programming for long-context reasoning
and suggest that leveraging models’ self-reflective signals is a promising direction for improving
long-context capabilities in language models.
References
[1] Shengnan An, Zexiong Ma, Zeqi Lin, Nanning Zheng, and Jian-Guang Lou. Make your llm
fully utilize the context, 2024.
[2] N. N. Author. Suppressed for anonymity, 2021.
[3] Y Bai, S Tu, J Zhang, H Peng, X Wang, X Lv, S Cao, J Xu, L Hou, Y Dong, et al. Longbenchv2:
Towards deeper understanding and reasoning on realistic long-context multitasks.ArXiv,
abs/2412.15204, 2024b. URL https://api. semanticscholar. org/CorpusID, 274859535, 2024.
[4] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao
Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and Juanzi Li. Longbench: A
bilingual, multitask benchmark for long context understanding, 2024.
[5] Marthe Ballon, Andres Algaba, and Vincent Ginis. The relationship between reasoning and
performance in large language models–o3 (mini) thinks harder, not longer.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.15631, 2025.
[6] Amanda Bertsch, Adithya Pratapa, Teruko Mitamura, Graham Neubig, and Matthew R
Gormley. Oolong: Evaluating long context reasoning and aggregation capabilities.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.02817, 2025.
[7] Eric Bigelow, Ari Holtzman, Hidenori Tanaka, and Tomer Ullman. Forking paths in neural text
generation, 2024.
[8] Shouyuan Chen, Sherman Wong, Liangjian Chen, and Yuandong Tian. Extending context
window of large language models via positional interpolation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15595,
2023.
[9] Yukang Chen, Shengju Qian, Haotian Tang, Xin Lai, Zhijian Liu, Song Han, and Jiaya
Jia. Longlora: Efficient fine-tuning of long-context large language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.12307, 2023.
[10] Zijian Chen, Xueguang Ma, Shengyao Zhuang, Ping Nie, Kai Zou, Andrew Liu, Joshua Green,
Kshama Patel, Ruoxi Meng, Mingyi Su, et al. Browsecomp-plus: A more fair and transparent
evaluation benchmark of deep-research agent.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06600, 2025.
[11] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Build-
ing production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413,
2025.
[12] Tri Dao and Albert Gu. Transformers are ssms: Generalized models and efficient algorithms
through structured state space duality.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21060, 2024.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
[13] Siddartha Devic, Charlotte Peale, Arwen Bradley, Sinead Williamson, Preetum Nakkiran, and
Aravind Gollakota. Trace length is a simple uncertainty signal in reasoning models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.10409, 2025.
[14] Yiran Ding, Li Lyna Zhang, Chengruidong Zhang, Yuanyuan Xu, Ning Shang, Jiahang Xu, Fan
Yang, and Mao Yang. Longrope: Extending llm context window beyond 2 million tokens.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.13753, 2024.
[15] Yufeng Du, Minyang Tian, Srikanth Ronanki, Subendhu Rongali, Sravan Bodapati, Aram
Galstyan, Azton Wells, Roy Schwartz, Eliu A Huerta, and Hao Peng. Context length alone
hurts llm performance despite perfect retrieval, 2025.
[16] Jinhao Duan, Hao Cheng, Shiqi Wang, Alex Zavalny, Chenan Wang, Renjing Xu, Bhavya
Kailkhura, and Kaidi Xu. Shifting attention to relevance: Towards the predictive uncertainty
quantification of free-form large language models. InProceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5050–5063, 2024.
[17] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork.Pattern Classification. John Wiley and Sons, 2nd
edition, 2000.
[18] Sabri Eyuboglu, Ryan Ehrlich, Simran Arora, Neel Guha, Dylan Zinsley, Emily Liu, Will Tennien,
Atri Rudra, James Zou, Azalia Mirhoseini, et al. Cartridges: Lightweight and general-purpose
long context representations via self-study.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06266, 2025.
[19] Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and Yarin Gal. Detecting hallucinations in
large language models using semantic entropy.Nature, 630(8017):625–630, 2024.
[20] Yao Fu, Rameswar Panda, Xinyao Niu, Xiang Yue, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yoon Kim, and
Hao Peng. Data engineering for scaling language models to 128k context.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.10171, 2024.
[21] Yizhao Gao, Zhichen Zeng, Dayou Du, Shijie Cao, Peiyuan Zhou, Jiaxing Qi, Junjie Lai, Hayden
Kwok-Hay So, Ting Cao, Fan Yang, et al. Seerattention: Learning intrinsic sparse attention in
your llms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13276, 2024.
[22] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces.
arxiv.arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 10, 2023.
[23] Michael Hassid, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Roy Schwartz. Don’t overthink it. preferring
shorter thinking chains for improved llm reasoning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17813, 2025.
[24] Kelly Hong, Anton Troynikov, and Jeff Huber. Context rot: How increasing input tokens
impacts llm performance. Technical report, Chroma Research, July 2025.
[25] Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shantanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia,
Yang Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context
language models?arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06654, 2024.
[26] Chengsong Huang, Langlin Huang, Jixuan Leng, Jiacheng Liu, and Jiaxin Huang. CaTS:
Calibrated test-time scaling for efficient LLM inference. InThe Fourteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
[27] Yuxuan Huang, Yihang Chen, Haozheng Zhang, Kang Li, Huichi Zhou, Meng Fang, Linyi Yang,
Xiaoguang Li, Lifeng Shang, Songcen Xu, Jianye Hao, Kun Shao, and Jun Wang. Deep research
agents: A systematic examination and roadmap, 2025.
[28] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark,
AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
[29] Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
[30] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
Karthik Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.
[31] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
Karthik Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?, 2024.
[32] Bowen Jin, Jinsung Yoon, Jiawei Han, and Sercan O Arik. Long-context llms meet rag:
Overcoming challenges for long inputs in rag.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05983, 2024.
[33] M. J. Kearns.Computational Complexity of Machine Learning. PhD thesis, Department of
Computer Science, Harvard University, 1989.
[34] Jannik Kossen, Jiatong Han, Muhammed Razzak, Lisa Schut, Shreshth Malik, and Yarin Gal.
Semantic entropy probes: Robust and cheap hallucination detection in llms.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15927, 2024.
[35] Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances
for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation, 2023.
[36] Xunhao Lai, Jianqiao Lu, Yao Luo, Yiyuan Ma, and Xun Zhou. Flexprefill: A context-
aware sparse attention mechanism for efficient long-sequence inference.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.20766, 2025.
[37] P. Langley. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Pat Langley, editor,Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), pages 1207–1216, Stanford,
CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.
[38] Yuhong Li, Yingbing Huang, Bowen Yang, Bharat Venkitesh, Acyr Locatelli, Hanchen Ye,
Tianle Cai, Patrick Lewis, and Deming Chen. Snapkv: Llm knows what you are looking for
before generation.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:22947–22970, 2024.
[39] Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty
in words, 2022.
[40] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni,
and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts, 2023.
[41] Qing Lyu, Kumar Shridhar, Chaitanya Malaviya, Li Zhang, Yanai Elazar, Niket Tandon,
Marianna Apidianaki, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Chris Callison-Burch. Calibrating large language
models with sample consistency, 2024.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
[42] Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark J. F. Gales. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box
hallucination detection for generative large language models, 2023.
[43] Yansheng Mao, Yufei Xu, Jiaqi Li, Fanxu Meng, Haotong Yang, Zilong Zheng, Xiyuan Wang,
and Muhan Zhang. Lift: Improving long context understanding of large language models
through long input fine-tuning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14644, 2025.
[44] Sara Vera Marjanović, Arkil Patel, Vaibhav Adlakha, Milad Aghajohari, Parishad
BehnamGhader, Mehar Bhatia, Aditi Khandelwal, Austin Kraft, Benno Krojer, Xing Han
Lù, et al. Deepseek-r1 thoughtology: Let’s think about llm reasoning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.07128, 2025.
[45] R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, and T. M. Mitchell, editors.Machine Learning: An Artificial
Intelligence Approach, Vol. I. Tioga, Palo Alto, CA, 1983.
[46] T. M. Mitchell. The need for biases in learning generalizations. Technical report, Computer
Science Department, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, MA, 1980.
[47] A. Newell and P. S. Rosenbloom. Mechanisms of skill acquisition and the law of practice. In
J. R. Anderson, editor,Cognitive Skills and Their Acquisition, chapter 1, pages 1–51. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, 1981.
[48] OpenAI. Deep research. https://openai.com/index/introducing-deepresearch/, 2025.
AI-powered research assistant tool.
[49] Litu Ou, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Zhongwang Zhang, Xixi Wu, Rui Ye, Zile Qiao,
Pengjun Xie, Jingren Zhou, and Yong Jiang. Browseconf: Confidence-guided test-time scaling
for web agents, 2025.
[50] Yuxiao Qu, Matthew YR Yang, Amrith Setlur, Lewis Tunstall, Edward Emanuel Beeching,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Aviral Kumar. Optimizing test-time compute via meta reinforcement
fine-tuning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07572, 2025.
[51] Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza.The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and
beyond, volume 4. Now Publishers Inc, 2009.
[52] A. L. Samuel. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers.IBM Journal of
Research and Development, 3(3):211–229, 1959.
[53] Tobias Schnabel, Kiran Tomlinson, Adith Swaminathan, and Jennifer Neville. Lost in transmis-
sion: When and why llms fail to reason globally, 2025.
[54] Parshin Shojaee, Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Maxwell Horton, Samy Bengio, and Mehrdad
Farajtabar. The illusion of thinking: Understanding the strengths and limitations of reasoning
models via the lens of problem complexity.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06941, 2025.
[55] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan
McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, Akshay Nathan, Alan Luo, Alec Helyar,
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandr Efremov, Aleksandra Spyra, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel,
Alex Karpenko, Alex Makelov, Alex Neitz, Alex Wei, Alexandra Barr, Alexandre Kirchmeyer,
Alexey Ivanov, Alexi Christakis, Alistair Gillespie, Allison Tam, Ally Bennett, Alvin Wan,
Alyssa Huang, Amy McDonald Sandjideh, Amy Yang, Ananya Kumar, Andre Saraiva, Andrea
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Vallone, Andrei Gheorghe, Andres Garcia Garcia, Andrew Braunstein, Andrew Liu, Andrew
Schmidt, Andrey Mereskin, Andrey Mishchenko, Andy Applebaum, Andy Rogerson, Ann Rajan,
Annie Wei, Anoop Kotha, Anubha Srivastava, Anushree Agrawal, Arun Vijayvergiya, Ashley
Tyra, Ashvin Nair, Avi Nayak, Ben Eggers, Bessie Ji, Beth Hoover, Bill Chen, Blair Chen,
Boaz Barak, Borys Minaiev, Botao Hao, Bowen Baker, Brad Lightcap, Brandon McKinzie,
Brandon Wang, Brendan Quinn, Brian Fioca, Brian Hsu, Brian Yang, Brian Yu, Brian Zhang,
Brittany Brenner, Callie Riggins Zetino, Cameron Raymond, Camillo Lugaresi, Carolina Paz,
Cary Hudson, Cedric Whitney, Chak Li, Charles Chen, Charlotte Cole, Chelsea Voss, Chen
Ding, Chen Shen, Chengdu Huang, Chris Colby, Chris Hallacy, Chris Koch, Chris Lu, Christina
Kaplan, Christina Kim, CJ Minott-Henriques, Cliff Frey, Cody Yu, Coley Czarnecki, Colin
Reid, Colin Wei, Cory Decareaux, Cristina Scheau, Cyril Zhang, Cyrus Forbes, Da Tang,
Dakota Goldberg, Dan Roberts, Dana Palmie, Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levine, Daniel Wright,
Dave Leo, David Lin, David Robinson, Declan Grabb, Derek Chen, Derek Lim, Derek Salama,
Dibya Bhattacharjee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dinghua Li, Dingli Yu, DJ Strouse, Drew Williams,
Dylan Hunn, Ed Bayes, Edwin Arbus, Ekin Akyurek, Elaine Ya Le, Elana Widmann, Eli Yani,
Elizabeth Proehl, Enis Sert, Enoch Cheung, Eri Schwartz, Eric Han, Eric Jiang, Eric Mitchell,
Eric Sigler, Eric Wallace, Erik Ritter, Erin Kavanaugh, Evan Mays, Evgenii Nikishin, Fangyuan
Li, Felipe Petroski Such, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Filippo Raso, Florent Bekerman, Foivos
Tsimpourlas, Fotis Chantzis, Francis Song, Francis Zhang, Gaby Raila, Garrett McGrath,
Gary Briggs, Gary Yang, Giambattista Parascandolo, Gildas Chabot, Grace Kim, Grace Zhao,
Gregory Valiant, Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Hanson Wang, Hao Sheng, Haoming Jiang,
Haoyu Wang, Haozhun Jin, Harshit Sikchi, Heather Schmidt, Henry Aspegren, Honglin Chen,
Huida Qiu, Hunter Lightman, Ian Covert, Ian Kivlichan, Ian Silber, Ian Sohl, Ibrahim Hammoud,
Ignasi Clavera, Ikai Lan, Ilge Akkaya, Ilya Kostrikov, Irina Kofman, Isak Etinger, Ishaan Singal,
Jackie Hehir, Jacob Huh, Jacqueline Pan, Jake Wilczynski, Jakub Pachocki, James Lee, James
Quinn, Jamie Kiros, Janvi Kalra, Jasmyn Samaroo, Jason Wang, Jason Wolfe, Jay Chen, Jay
Wang, Jean Harb, Jeffrey Han, Jeffrey Wang, Jennifer Zhao, Jeremy Chen, Jerene Yang, Jerry
Tworek, Jesse Chand, Jessica Landon, Jessica Liang, Ji Lin, Jiancheng Liu, Jianfeng Wang, Jie
Tang, Jihan Yin, Joanne Jang, Joel Morris, Joey Flynn, Johannes Ferstad, Johannes Heidecke,
John Fishbein, John Hallman, Jonah Grant, Jonathan Chien, Jonathan Gordon, Jongsoo Park,
Jordan Liss, Jos Kraaijeveld, Joseph Guay, Joseph Mo, Josh Lawson, Josh McGrath, Joshua
Vendrow, Joy Jiao, Julian Lee, Julie Steele, Julie Wang, Junhua Mao, Kai Chen, Kai Hayashi,
Kai Xiao, Kamyar Salahi, Kan Wu, Karan Sekhri, Karan Sharma, Karan Singhal, Karen Li,
Kenny Nguyen, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin King, Kevin Liu, Kevin Stone, Kevin Yu, Kristen
Ying, Kristian Georgiev, Kristie Lim, Kushal Tirumala, Kyle Miller, Lama Ahmad, Larry
Lv, Laura Clare, Laurance Fauconnet, Lauren Itow, Lauren Yang, Laurentia Romaniuk, Leah
Anise, Lee Byron, Leher Pathak, Leon Maksin, Leyan Lo, Leyton Ho, Li Jing, Liang Wu, Liang
Xiong, Lien Mamitsuka, Lin Yang, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Liz Bourgeois, Logan
Engstrom, Lorenz Kuhn, Louis Feuvrier, Lu Zhang, Lucas Switzer, Lukas Kondraciuk, Lukasz
Kaiser, Manas Joglekar, Mandeep Singh, Mandip Shah, Manuka Stratta, Marcus Williams, Mark
Chen, Mark Sun, Marselus Cayton, Martin Li, Marvin Zhang, Marwan Aljubeh, Matt Nichols,
Matthew Haines, Max Schwarzer, Mayank Gupta, Meghan Shah, Melody Huang, Meng Dong,
Mengqing Wang, Mia Glaese, Micah Carroll, Michael Lampe, Michael Malek, Michael Sharman,
Michael Zhang, Michele Wang, Michelle Pokrass, Mihai Florian, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles Wang,
Ming Chen, Mingxuan Wang, Minnia Feng, Mo Bavarian, Molly Lin, Moose Abdool, Mostafa
Rohaninejad, Nacho Soto, Natalie Staudacher, Natan LaFontaine, Nathan Marwell, Nelson Liu,
Nick Preston, Nick Turley, Nicklas Ansman, Nicole Blades, Nikil Pancha, Nikita Mikhaylin,
Niko Felix, Nikunj Handa, Nishant Rai, Nitish Keskar, Noam Brown, Ofir Nachum, Oleg Boiko,
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Oleg Murk, Olivia Watkins, Oona Gleeson, Pamela Mishkin, Patryk Lesiewicz, Paul Baltescu,
Pavel Belov, Peter Zhokhov, Philip Pronin, Phillip Guo, Phoebe Thacker, Qi Liu, Qiming
Yuan, Qinghua Liu, Rachel Dias, Rachel Puckett, Rahul Arora, Ravi Teja Mullapudi, Raz
Gaon, Reah Miyara, Rennie Song, Rishabh Aggarwal, RJ Marsan, Robel Yemiru, Robert Xiong,
Rohan Kshirsagar, Rohan Nuttall, Roman Tsiupa, Ronen Eldan, Rose Wang, Roshan James,
Roy Ziv, Rui Shu, Ruslan Nigmatullin, Saachi Jain, Saam Talaie, Sam Altman, Sam Arnesen,
Sam Toizer, Sam Toyer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Sarah Yoo, Savannah Heon,
Scott Ethersmith, Sean Grove, Sean Taylor, Sebastien Bubeck, Sever Banesiu, Shaokyi Amdo,
Shengjia Zhao, Sherwin Wu, Shibani Santurkar, Shiyu Zhao, Shraman Ray Chaudhuri, Shreyas
Krishnaswamy, Shuaiqi, Xia, Shuyang Cheng, Shyamal Anadkat, Simón Posada Fishman, Simon
Tobin, Siyuan Fu, Somay Jain, Song Mei, Sonya Egoian, Spencer Kim, Spug Golden, SQ Mah,
Steph Lin, Stephen Imm, Steve Sharpe, Steve Yadlowsky, Sulman Choudhry, Sungwon Eum,
Suvansh Sanjeev, Tabarak Khan, Tal Stramer, Tao Wang, Tao Xin, Tarun Gogineni, Taya
Christianson, Ted Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thomas Degry, Thomas Shadwell, Tianfu Fu,
Tianshi Gao, Timur Garipov, Tina Sriskandarajah, Toki Sherbakov, Tomer Kaftan, Tomo
Hiratsuka, Tongzhou Wang, Tony Song, Tony Zhao, Troy Peterson, Val Kharitonov, Victoria
Chernova, Vineet Kosaraju, Vishal Kuo, Vitchyr Pong, Vivek Verma, Vlad Petrov, Wanning
Jiang, Weixing Zhang, Wenda Zhou, Wenlei Xie, Wenting Zhan, Wes McCabe, Will DePue, Will
Ellsworth, Wulfie Bain, Wyatt Thompson, Xiangning Chen, Xiangyu Qi, Xin Xiang, Xinwei
Shi, Yann Dubois, Yaodong Yu, Yara Khakbaz, Yifan Wu, Yilei Qian, Yin Tat Lee, Yinbo
Chen, Yizhen Zhang, Yizhong Xiong, Yonglong Tian, Young Cha, Yu Bai, Yu Yang, Yuan Yuan,
Yuanzhi Li, Yufeng Zhang, Yuguang Yang, Yujia Jin, Yun Jiang, Yunyun Wang, Yushi Wang,
Yutian Liu, Zach Stubenvoll, Zehao Dou, Zheng Wu, and Zhigang Wang. Openai gpt-5 system
card, 2025.
[56] Weiwei Sun, Miao Lu, Zhan Ling, Kang Liu, Xuesong Yao, Yiming Yang, and Jiecao Chen.
Scaling long-horizon llm agent via context-folding, 2025.
[57] Jiaming Tang, Yilong Zhao, Kan Zhu, Guangxuan Xiao, Baris Kasikci, and Song Han. Quest:
Query-aware sparsity for efficient long-context llm inference.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10774,
2024.
[58] Linwei Tao, Yi-Fan Yeh, Minjing Dong, Tao Huang, Philip Torr, and Chang Xu. Revisiting
uncertainty estimation and calibration of large language models, 2025.
[59] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025.
[60] Arne Vanhoyweghen, Brecht Verbeken, Andres Algaba, and Vincent Ginis. Lexical hints of
accuracy in llm reasoning chains.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15842, 2025.
[61] Roger Waleffe, Wonmin Byeon, Duncan Riach, Brandon Norick, Vijay Korthikanti, Tri Dao,
Albert Gu, Ali Hatamizadeh, Sudhakar Singh, Deepak Narayanan, et al. An empirical study of
mamba-based language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07887, 2024.
[62] Weizhi Wang, Li Dong, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Xifeng Yan, Jianfeng Gao, and Furu
Wei. Augmenting language models with long-term memory.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:74530–74543, 2023.
[63] Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji.
Executable code actions elicit better llm agents. InForty-first International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2024.
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
[64] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
[65] Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McKinney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won
Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. Browsecomp: A simple yet
challenging benchmark for browsing agents.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12516, 2025.
[66] Xixi Wu, Kuan Li, Yida Zhao, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Huifeng Yin, Zhongwang Zhang, Xinmiao
Yu, Dingchu Zhang, Yong Jiang, et al. Resum: Unlocking long-horizon search intelligence via
context summarization.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13313, 2025.
[67] Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming
language models with attention sinks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
[68] Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can
llms express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.13063, 2023.
[69] Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can llms
express their uncertainty? an empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in llms, 2024.
[70] Daniel Yang, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, and Makoto Yamada. On verbalized confidence scores for
llms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14737, 2024.
[71] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. InThe eleventh international
conference on learning representations, 2022.
[72] Dongkeun Yoon, Seungone Kim, Sohee Yang, Sunkyoung Kim, Soyeon Kim, Yongil Kim, Eunbi
Choi, Yireun Kim, and Minjoon Seo. Reasoning models better express their confidence.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.14489, 2025.
[73] Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin
Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, et al. Memagent: Reshaping long-context
llm with multi-conv rl-based memory agent.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02259, 2025.
[74] Qingcheng Zeng, Weihao Xuan, Leyang Cui, and Rob Voigt. Thinking out loud: Do reasoning
models know when they’re right? InProceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1394–1407, 2025.
[75] Alex L Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. Recursive language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.24601, 2025.
[76] Anqi Zhang, Yulin Chen, Jane Pan, Chen Zhao, Aurojit Panda, Jinyang Li, and He He.
Reasoning models know when they’re right: Probing hidden states for self-verification.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.05419, 2025.
[77] Guibin Zhang, Muxin Fu, Guancheng Wan, Miao Yu, Kun Wang, and Shuicheng Yan. G-memory:
Tracing hierarchical memory for multi-agent systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07398, 2025.
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
[78] Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar
Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, Urmish Thakker, James Zou,
and Kunle Olukotun. Agentic context engineering: Evolving contexts for self-improving language
models, 2025.
[79] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel:
Llm agents are experiential learners, 2024.
[80] Liang Zhao, Tianwen Wei, Liang Zeng, Cheng Cheng, Liu Yang, Peng Cheng, Lijie Wang,
Chenxia Li, Xuejie Wu, Bo Zhu, et al. Longskywork: A training recipe for efficiently extending
context length in large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00605, 2024.
[81] Kunlun Zhu, Zijia Liu, Bingxuan Li, Muxin Tian, Yingxuan Yang, Jiaxun Zhang, Pengrui Han,
Qipeng Xie, Fuyang Cui, Weijia Zhang, Xiaoteng Ma, Xiaodong Yu, Gowtham Ramesh, Jialian
Wu, Zicheng Liu, Pan Lu, James Zou, and Jiaxuan You. Where llm agents fail and how they
can learn from failures, 2025.
[82] Younan Zhu, Linwei Tao, Minjing Dong, and Chang Xu. Mitigating object hallucinations in
large vision-language models via attention calibration, 2025.
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
A Details on Datasets
BrowseComp-Plus[ 10] is a controlled evaluation benchmark for “deep research” agents: systems
that combine LLM reasoning with search/retrieval tools to answer complex, reasoning-intensive,
fact-seeking questions that require combining evidence across multiple sources. Unlike evaluations
that rely on live, opaque web search APIs, BrowseComp-Plus fixes the document corpus, enabling
reproducible experiments and clearer separation between retrieval failures and reasoning failures.
BrowseComp-Plus is derived from BrowseComp [65], a benchmark of challenging short-answer
browsing problems originally released by OpenAI. BrowseComp was intentionally designed around
short, verifiable answers to keep grading straightforward, even though the search process may be
difficult. The BrowseComp-Plus dataset is publicly available∗ with queries, and the document
relevance judgments, including query text and per-query lists of evidence, gold, and negative
documents. To reduce benchmark leakage into training corpora of frontier language models and
discourage copying benchmark content, the dataset release is obfuscated (with query_id as the only
non-obfuscated field), and includes explicit anti-leakage canary mechanisms. To use the dataset, we
need to first decrypt the dataset as suggested here.
In our experiments, we use the “1K documents” evaluation setup, following [75]: for each question,
instead of performing live retrieval, we provide 1,000 randomly selected documents as the long
context, with the guarantee that the question’s gold and evidence documents exist within that subset;
we then evaluate on 150 randomly sampled questions and report accuracy (percentage of correct
final answers). The distribution of context length in terms of tokens across these 150 questions are
provided in Figure 6. In our setup, we compute robust accuracy using an LLM-as-Judge framework.
Instead of relying on exact string matching, the judge compares the model’s generated answer with
the provided ground truth using an evaluation prompt (see Section B.2), allowing for semantically
equivalent or string variations of an answer.
OOLONG[ 6] is a long-context benchmark designed to evaluate large-scale information aggregation.
It is motivated by the observation that many long-context benchmarks reduce to sparse retrieval
tasks (i.e., needle-in-a-haystack settings where most of the input is irrelevant noise). In contrast,
many real-world long-context tasks require processing a substantial portion of the context and
aggregating numerous small decisions to produce a final answer. OOLONG benchmark is divided
into two categories: OOLONG-synth, which consists of “naturalistic synthetic” tasks derived from
existing in-context learning classification datasets and enables controlled analysis of difficulty factors;
and OOLONG-real, which contains downstream aggregation questions over long-form conversational
transcripts, designed to be less easily decomposed into independent in-context learning examples.
In our experiments, we focus on the OOLONG-synthtrec_coarse configuration, following [75].
We evaluate 650 tasks across context lengths ranging from 1K to 8M tokens (50 tasks per context
length as shown in Figure 6) and report accuracy following the benchmark’s original scoring protocol,
including exponential partial credit for numeric outputs. For categorical outputs (e.g., labels, dates,
user IDs, or comparisons), correctness is determined by exact match with the ground truth or by
judge-based equivalence assessment (with same prompt from Section B.2). For numeric outputs, the
score is computed as0.75|y−ˆy|which assigns partial credit as predictions approach the true value.
We use the publicly available dataset† together with the official open-source code‡ for experiments.
LongBench-v2[ 3] is an extended version of the LongBench benchmark [4], designed to evaluate the
∗https://huggingface.co/datasets/Tevatron/browsecomp-plus
†https://huggingface.co/datasets/oolongbench/oolong-synth
‡https://github.com/abertsch72/oolong
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M 8.4M
Context Length (tokens)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Count
50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50
N = 650  |  Median = 66K
OOLONG
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
Context Length (tokens)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
31
88
73
129
87
47
17
21
10
N = 503  |  Median = 99K
LongBench-v2
5.4M 6.2M 7.1M 7.9M 8.7M 9.5M 10.3M 11.1M
Context Length (tokens)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
3
9
16
36
20
19 19
11
5
6
1 1 1
2
N = 149  |  Median = 7.3M
BrowseComp+ (1K)
Figure 6: Distribution of input context lengths across different benchmarks: OOLONG, LongBench-
v2, and BrowseComp-Plus.
ability of large language models to perform reasoning and comprehension over diverse realistic long
contexts. To make evaluation more robust and less sensitive to generation formatting, the benchmark
standardizes tasks into multiple-choice questions (A/B/C/D), allowing consistent comparison across
models with different behaviors. LongBench-v2 contains 503 evaluation instances with context
lengths ranging from 8K to 4M tokens. The overall context length distribution of this dataset is
shown in Figure 6. The benchmark spans a wide spectrum of realistic long-context scenarios and is
organized into six task categories: single-document question answering, multi-document question
answering, long in-context learning, dialogue history understanding, code repository understanding,
and long structured data understanding. These categories collectively capture a diverse set of
long-context reasoning patterns, including extracting from and comprehending lengthy documents,
synthesizing and finding evidence across multiple sources, reasoning over extended conversational
histories, understanding large software repositories, and querying or aggregating information from
large structured tables. The detailed context length distributions for each of these domain categories
are provided in Figure 7.
To assess how different long-context methods generalize across diverse domains, we evaluate on all
task categories of the LongBench-v2 dataset in our experiments. This differs from prior work [75],
which focuses only on the CodeQA subset of the benchmark. Using the full benchmark enables
a more comprehensive evaluation of long-context capability across heterogeneous domains and
task semantics. In our experiments, we use the official LongBench-v2 dataset which is publicly
available§ together with the benchmark’s open-source code for evaluation¶. Simialr to other datasets,
to evaluate correctness of answers in this benchmark, we also use the judge with prompt as in
Section B.2.
B Prompt Details
B.1 Verbalized Confidence Elicitation
At each intermediate generation stept of every candidate programp(k), we elicit the model’s self-
assessed confidence by appending a fixed structured instruction to the generation prompt. The
instruction is designed to (i) require the model to produce a parseable confidence score, (ii) enforce
§https://huggingface.co/datasets/zai-org/LongBench-v2
¶https://github.com/THUDM/LongBench
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
0
10
20
30
40
50
Count
15
48
18
45
33
12
4
N=175
Single-Doc QA
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
14
19
36
21
23
8
3
1
N=125
Multi-Doc QA
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
0
5
10
15
20
25
2
5 6
28
16
14
2
8
N=81
In-Context Learning
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
Context Lengt (tokens)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Count
3 3
9
4
6 6
10
9N=50
Code QA
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
Context Lengt (tokens)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
12
8
19
N=39
Dialogue History QA
8K 16K 33K 66K 131K 262K 524K 1.0M 2.1M 4.2M
Context Lengt (tokens)
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
7
11
7
2 2
1
N=33
Structured Data QA
LongBench-v2
Figure 7: Context length distributions for different task categories in LongBench-v2 benchmark
dataset.
a consistent format across all steps and all programs, and (iii) encourage nuanced and calibrated
self-assessment rather than coarse or overconfident reporting. The following instruction is appended
verbatim to the model’s prompt for every generation. For the rare cases that the verbalized confidence
is not provided by model, the average of verbalized confidence of other steps in the same trajectory
is used to fill the gap.
Confidence Prompt
IMPORTANT: At the end of your response, you MUST include
your confidence in your answer using this exact JSON format
on a new line:
‘‘‘json
{"confidence": <number between 0.000 and 100.000
with up to 3 decimal points>}
‘‘‘
Be precise and nuanced in your confidence assessment.
B.2 Evaluation Judge
To compute final task accuracy across all datasets used in our experiments, we employ an LLM-as-
Judge evaluation procedure. Many long-context benchmarks contain answers that may appear in
slightly different textual forms while still being semantically correct (e.g., variations in phrasing,
formatting differences, or additional explanatory details). Relying solely on exact string matching can
therefore incorrectly penalize some of the valid and semantically equivalent answers. To address this
issue, we use an automated judge model with the prompt below that compares the model-generated
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
responses with the ground-truth answer and determines correctness based on semantic equivalence
rather than strict lexical matching.
Grading Prompt
Judge whether the following [response] to [question] is correct or not
based on the precise and unambiguous [correct_answer] below.
[question]: {QUESTION}
[response]: {RESPONSE}
[correct_answer]: {CORRECT_ANSWER}
Your judgement must be in the format and criteria specified below:
extracted_final_answer: The final exact answer extracted from the [response].
correct_answer: Repeat the [correct_answer] given above.
reasoning: Explain why the extracted_final_answer is correct or incorrect based on
[correct_answer], in the context of this [question]. You should judge
whether the extracted_final_answer is semantically equivalent to
[correct_answer], allowing the extracted_final_answer to be string
variations of [correct_answer]. You should also allow the
extracted_final_answer to be more precise or verbose than
[correct_answer], as long as its additional details are correct.
Do not comment on any background to the problem, do not attempt to
solve the problem, do not argue for any answer different than
[correct_answer], focus only on whether the answers are
semantically equivalent.
correct: Answer ’yes’ if extracted_final_answer matches the [correct_answer]
given above, or is within a small margin of error for numerical
problems. Answer ’no’ otherwise, i.e. if there is any inconsistency,
ambiguity, non-equivalency, or if the extracted answer is incorrect.
confidence: The extracted confidence score between 0|%
C Additional Results
C.1 Detailed Results Across Context Lengths
Improvement over the base model.In this section, we provide a more detailed view of the
context-length experiments summarized in Section 3.5. While the main paper presents aggregated
results for comparison to base across context splits and task domains in LongBench-v2 dataset,
Figure 8-11 show performance trends at a finer granularity across context-length bins and different
task categories. These additional results help illustrate how different approaches behave as the input
context grows from moderately long inputs to ver long multi-million token sequences. Figures 8 and 9
present the detailed improvement relative to the base model (∆vs. base) for each context-length bin
on the OOLONG and LongBench-v2 benchmarks, respectively. Each bin contains approximately
the same number of evaluation instances to ensure fair comparison across context scales. The plots
report the performance difference between each method and the base model, allowing us to directly
observe whether a method improves or degrades performance at different context lengths. As it can
be shown, the context length is separated into contexts within (<131K) and near/beyond (≥ 131K)
the model’s context window with the highlighted yellow background.
Consistent with the trends observed in Figure 2 in the main paper, the advantage ofSRLM becomes
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M 4M
Context Length
0
20
40
∆ vs Base (pp)
OOLONG (GPT-5)
RLM
RLM (no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM (no sub-call)
1K 2K 4K 8K 16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M 4M
Context Length
20
0
20
40
60
∆ vs Base (pp)
OOLONG (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
RLM
RLM (no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM (no sub-call)
Figure 8: Performance gains over the base model across context lengths on the OOLONG benchmark.
Bars show accuracy change vs. base for each context-length bin. Results are shown for GPT-5 (top)
and Qwen3-Coder-480B (bottom). The shaded yellow region marks contexts near or beyond the
context window limits (≥131K tokens).
more pronounced at longer contexts. In both benchmarks and across both backbone models, the
improvement over the base model increases as context length grows. In contrast, RLM mostly
underperforms the base model at shorter context lengths, indicating that recursive decomposition
may introduce unnecessary overhead when the context already fits within the model’s window.
Task-domain analysis.To further understand how long-context methods behave across different
types of reasoning tasks, Figures 10 and 11 provide detailed breakdowns by task category for the
context analysis performance on LongBench-v2 benchmark. These plots report both the absolute
accuracy and the improvement relative to the base model across context lengths detailed for each
task domain. The results reveal that the benefits self-reflection inSRLM are consistent across
diverse tasks, including code repository understanding, single-document question answering, multi-
document question answering, and long in-context learning. In particular, improvements become
more pronounces once the context length approaches or exceeds the context window limits of the
underlying model (shaded yellow region).
C.2 Detailed Ablation Results
This section provides a detailed breakdown of the ablation experiments summarized in Section 3.8.
While the main paper reports aggregated results across recursive/nonrecursive runs and backbones,
the figures in this appendix present the results separately for each backbone model, dataset, and
execution setting. These analyses allow us to better understand how individual uncertainty signals
contribute to the performance of SRLM under different conditions.
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
15K 26K 47K 83K 115K 156K 270K 1M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
∆ vs Base (pp)
LongBench-v2 (GPT-5)
RLM
RLM (no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM (no sub-call)
15K 26K 47K 83K 115K 156K 270K 1M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
∆ vs Base (pp)
LongBench-v2 (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
RLM
RLM (no sub-call)
SRLM
SRLM (no sub-call)
Figure 9: Performance gains over the base model across context lengths on the LongBench-v2
benchmark. Bars show accuracy change vs. base for each context-length bin with balanced samples.
Results are shown for GPT-5 (top) and Qwen3-Coder-480B (bottom) backbones. The shaded
yellow region marks contexts near or beyond the context window limits (≥131K tokens).
Figure 12 shows the detailed analysis for contribution of each uncertainty signal used in the
self-reflection mechanism ofSRLM. The results are reported separately for GPT-5 and Qwen3-
Coder-480B backbones, as well as for runs with recursive sub-calls and runs without sub-calls.
Across all datasets and model backbones, the fullSRLM configuration consistently achieves the best
performance. Variants that rely on individual uncertainty signals alone show smaller improvements
compared to the combination in SRLM for all the queries with context length ≥ 131K. This
observation confirms that the three uncertainty signals capture complementary aspects of model
uncertainty during reasoning and this is true across all backbones and runs. The detailed plots also
reveal that the relative contribution of each signal can vary depending on the backbone model and
dataset. For example, reasoning trace length tends to provide stronger signals in some datasets,
whereas verbalized confidence tends to be more informative on others when the model’s internal
calibration is reliable. However, across all settings, combining the signals through the self-reflection
mechanism consistently provides the best performance.
Figure 13 further analyzes the interaction between fine-grained signals of verbalized confidence and
reasoning trace length. For this analysis, predictions are grouped into bins with approximately equal
numbers of samples based on their confidence scores and reasoning trace lengths. Each heatmap cell
reports the empirical accuracy obtained for a given combination of these two signals. The heatmaps
reveal several interesting patterns. For example, the relation between verbalized confidence and
accuracy is not strictly monotonic, i.e., predictions with high confidence do not always correspond
to correct answers. Similarly, shorter or longer reasoning traces alone do not reliably indicate
correctness. Instead, the highest accuracy regions often appear when both signals align and their
joint combination is considered. By jointly considering semantic uncertainty (verbalized confidence)
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
and behavioral uncertainty (reasoning trace characteristics),SRLM is able to provide more reliable
self-reflection for context-interaction programs in the scope of long-context.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M 4M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Code Repository Understanding (GPT-5)
32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M 4M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Code Repository Understanding (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
8K 16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K
Context Length
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Single-Document QA (GPT-5)
8K 16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K
Context Length
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Single-Document QA (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
8K 16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K
Context Length
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Multi-Document QA (GPT-5)
8K 16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K
Context Length
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Multi-Document QA (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Long In-context Learning (GPT-5)
16K 32K 65K 131K 262K 524K 1M 2M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
Long In-context Learning (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
Base RLM RLM (no sub-call) SRLM SRLM (no sub-call)
Figure 10: Accuracy versus context length across LongBench-v2 task categories. Results for GPT-5
(left) and Qwen3-Coder-480B (right) backbones, with each subplot showing performance across
context scales for a specific task domain.
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
41K 85K 162K 371K 704K 1M 2M 3M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
100
∆ vs Base (pp)
Code Repository Understanding (GPT-5)
41K 85K 162K 371K 704K 1M 2M 3M
Context Length
25
0
25
50
75
∆ vs Base (pp)
Code Repository Understanding (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
15K 19K 27K 55K 90K 119K 169K 389K
Context Length
20
0
20
40
∆ vs Base (pp)
Single-Document QA (GPT-5)
15K 19K 27K 55K 90K 119K 169K 389K
Context Length
20
0
20
∆ vs Base (pp)
Single-Document QA (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
12K 23K 39K 51K 69K 122K 205K 489K
Context Length
20
10
0
10
20
30
∆ vs Base (pp)
Multi-Document QA (GPT-5)
12K 23K 39K 51K 69K 122K 205K 489K
Context Length
20
0
20
40
∆ vs Base (pp)
Multi-Document QA (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
27K 72K 93K 119K 146K 228K 323K 1M
Context Length
0
20
40
60
80
∆ vs Base (pp)
Long In-context Learning (GPT-5)
27K 72K 93K 119K 146K 228K 323K 1M
Context Length
40
20
0
20
40
60
∆ vs Base (pp)
Long In-context Learning (Qwen3-Coder-480B)
RLM RLM (no sub-call) SRLM SRLM (no sub-call)
Figure 11: Improvement over the base model across context lengths for LongBench-v2 task domains.
Results for GPT-5 (left) and Qwen3-Coder-480B (right), with each subplot showing performance
change across context scales for a specific task domain.
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
(a) Recursive
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
35
40
45
50
55
Accuracy (%)
GPT-5
OOLONG
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
55
60
65
70
75
LongBench-v2
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
82.5
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
95.0
97.5
BrowseComp+ (1K)
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
35
40
45
Accuracy (%)
Qwen3-Coder-480B
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
42.5
45.0
47.5
50.0
52.5
55.0
57.5
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
40
45
50
55
60
(b) No Sub-call
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
(no sub-call)
35
40
45
50
Accuracy (%)
GPT-5
OOLONG
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
(no sub-call)
55
60
65
LongBench-v2
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
(no sub-call)
85
90
95
100
BrowseComp+ (1K)
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
(no sub-call)
25
30
35
40
Accuracy (%)
Qwen3-Coder-480B
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
(no sub-call)
40
45
50
55
+Verb.Conf. +TraceLen. +Self-
Consist.
SRLM
(no sub-call)
35
40
45
50
Figure 12: Ablation of uncertainty signals in SRLM ’s self-reflection mechanism. Results for
GPT-5 and Qwen3-Coder-480B backbones on OOLONG, LongBench-v2, and BrowseComp+ (1K)
benchmarks with context≥ 131K.(a) Withrecursive sub-calls;(b) Withoutrecursive sub-calls.
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
(a) Recursive
43.1 67.4 74.6 79.8 83.6 86.5 89.0 91.2 93.5 97.2
8K
20K
30K
34K
38K
41K
44K
48K
52K
66K
Trace Length
GPT-5
OOLONG
42.5 72.7 77.6 81.7 84.8 87.3 89.7 91.9 94.4 97.7
4K
8K
14K
22K
27K
30K
33K
36K
41K
56K
LongBench-v2
30.3 58.5 69.5 75.9 79.9 83.0 85.7 87.9 90.0 94.7
7K
11K
13K
14K
15K
16K
17K
18K
20K
27K
BrowseComp+ (1K)
44.3 82.2 85.3 87.0 89.4 91.6 93.1 94.1 94.7 97.4
Verbalized Confidence
5K
8K
13K
20K
24K
27K
30K
36K
44K
55K
Trace Length
Qwen3-Coder-480B
64.3 85.3 85.6 86.5 88.5 91.2 93.3 94.4 95.1 97.3
Verbalized Confidence
8K
17K
22K
25K
28K
31K
35K
39K
45K
53K
22.6 57.1 75.9 80.2 83.1 85.0 85.6 87.5 91.0 96.4
Verbalized Confidence
16K
30K
35K
40K
43K
47K
50K
53K
58K
69K
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
(b) No Sub-call
43.4 70.6 76.8 81.1 84.3 86.9 89.0 91.0 93.1 97.0
9K
18K
25K
31K
37K
41K
44K
48K
54K
75K
Trace Length
GPT-5
OOLONG
37.0 75.0 80.6 84.3 86.7 88.6 90.6 92.6 94.7 97.6
6K
15K
22K
26K
29K
31K
34K
37K
41K
59K
LongBench-v2
30.8 62.9 72.1 77.3 80.9 83.7 86.1 88.3 90.4 94.8
7K
11K
12K
14K
15K
16K
17K
19K
20K
26K
BrowseComp+ (1K)
35.3 76.6 83.9 86.1 88.4 91.0 92.9 94.2 94.8 97.5
Verbalized Confidence
4K
8K
12K
18K
22K
26K
29K
35K
43K
64K
Trace Length
Qwen3-Coder-480B
42.5 84.8 85.6 85.7 86.4 89.0 92.3 93.9 94.7 97.5
Verbalized Confidence
7K
16K
23K
27K
32K
37K
41K
47K
54K
73K
27.4 64.9 77.6 82.3 85.0 85.6 85.8 88.5 92.5 96.5
Verbalized Confidence
15K
27K
33K
36K
39K
43K
47K
52K
58K
75K
0
20
40
60
80
Accuracy (%)
Figure 13: Analysis of the relationship between verbalized confidence, reasoning length, and accuracy.
Heatmaps show accuracy across equal-sample bins of confidence (x-axis) and reasoning length
(y-axis). Results are reported for GPT-5 and Qwen3-Coder-480B backbones on the OOLONG,
LongBench-v2, and BrowseComp+ (1K) benchmarks with context≥ 131K.(a) Withrecursive
sub-calls;(b) Withoutrecursive sub-calls.
31
