--- PAGE 1 ---
CEDAR: Context Engineering for Agentic Data Science
Rishiraj Saha Roy1 Chris Hinze 1 Luzian Hahn 1 Fabian Küch 1
Abstract
We demonstrate CEDAR( Context Engineering for
Data science withAgent Routing), an application
for automating data science (DS) tasks with an
agentic setup. Solving DS problems with LLMs
is an underexplored area that has immense market
value. The challenges are manifold: task complex-
ities, data sizes, computational limitations, and
context restrictions. We show that these can be
alleviated via effective context engineering. We
first impose structure into the initial prompt with
DS-specific input fields, that serve as instructions
for the agentic system. The solution is then mate-
rialized as an enumerated sequence of interleaved
plan and code blocks generated by separate LLM
agents, providing a readable structure to the
context at any step of the workflow. Function calls
for generating these intermediate texts, and for
corresponding Python code, ensure that data stays
local, and only aggregate statistics and associated
instructions are injected into LLM prompts. Fault
tolerance and context management are introduced
via iterative code generation and smart history ren-
dering. The viability of our agentic data scientist is
demonstrated using canonical Kaggle challenges.
1. Introduction
Motivation. In traditional data science (DS), a human expert,
the data scientist, writes scripts for entire pipelines, including
standard steps like data preprocessing, feature engineering,
hyperparameter tuning, and finally computing metrics and
visualizing insights. However, this work is tedious and
repetitive, and can be significantly optimized with modern
LLMs. For example, many users are exploring options
like ChatGPT Advanced Data Analysis, where one simply
uploads data and articulates entire problems as prompts.
However, such approaches have several limitations:
(i) concrete instructions for real DS projects are more
complex than can be solved via one-shot prompting; (ii)
1Department of Generative AI, Fraunhofer IIS, Am Wolfs-
mantel 33, 91058 Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany. Correspondence:
rishiraj.saha.roy@iis.fraunhofer.de
capabilities of generative models are still limited with
respect to arbitrary mathematical computations; (iii) data
files are often very large and cannot simply be uploaded as
attachments (ChatGPT Advanced Data Analysis has a limit
of 512 MB per file, many Kaggle files are much larger); (iv)
there are often privacy concerns and users may feel insecure
uploading their enterprise data to cloud-based LLMs; and (v)
DS solutions are typically multi-step: as a solution workflow
progresses, simply packing all instructions, text, code, data,
and results into the running context makes it unintelligible
for most LLMs, and often exceeds context length limits.
Limitations of state-of-the-art. Agentic systems now
power many real-world information retrieval (IR) and
machine learning (ML) applications, where LLMs perform
various roles in complex task pipelines (see, for example, (He
et al., 2024), (Chu et al., 2025), (Qiu et al., 2024)). DS
is a unique instance of such complexity, tightly coupling
IR, ML, and traditional statistics. Agentic systems with
effective context management can alleviate most of the above
problems for DS tasks. This has become an active research
area (Maojun et al., 2025; Jing et al., 2024), where the best
systems usually achieve impressive results via sophisticated
prompt chaining. But we found that it is very difficult for
a typical end-user to get a clear idea into how the task is
actually being solved (Grosnit et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024;
Hong et al., 2024). The closest work to ours’ is the very re-
cent Jupyter Agent 2 (Colle et al., 2025) from Hugging Face.
However, contrary to our application, Jupyter Agent 2 does
not run locally: data needs to be uploaded to its cloud, and
the time taken depends heavily on one’s network bandwidth
(usually very slow). Also, the privacy of the uploaded data is
not guaranteed. The purpose of our system CEDARis to bring
transparency and simplicity into DS solutions with LLMs.
Approach. CEDAR relies on effectivecontext engineering,
collectively referring to strategies for maintaining an optimal
set of tokens during LLM inference, including all information
that may land there outside of prompts1. An overview of our
workflow is in Fig. 1. The data scientist formulates the task
as a structured prompt, that is passed on to an orchestrator
agent. This agent routes text and code generation requests
to sub-agents as tools, to generate a readable solution with
1https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/
effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents
1
arXiv:2601.06606v1  [cs.LG]  10 Jan 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
CEDAR: Context Engineering for Agentic Data Science
short steps. The human inspects final outputs and revises
instructions for further iterations, if necessary. Code will
be released soon on GitHub after internal clearance.
Audience. The app can be used by beginner to expert-level
IR, ML, NLP, and AI practitioners. IR and ML basics help,
but there is no prerequisite of core DS knowledge to interpret
the workflow: each solution step has natural language (NL)
explanations. Beginners can get a feel of how basic data
science tasks are solved. Intermediate users can contrast the
faithfulness of the generated solution to the original intent,
and gain insights into how agentic systems can be built for
simplifying DS. Experts can scrutinize LLM-generated code
snippets, and whether the generated solution mimics code
written by a human data scientist.
Scope. Our system can solve beginner-level data science
tasks from Kaggle. The current requirements are simply to
have a clearly articulated goal and well-defined data.
2. Method
We now describe the key features of the CEDARpipeline:
prompts, the agentic setup, tool use, reliance on code for
plan execution, and history rendering.
2.1. Structured prompts
To relieve the user from creating verbose prompts
containing every pertinent task detail, we create a structured
form that covers key aspects of most DS tasks. We split the
project summary into high-levelgeneral instructions(esti-
mated number of solution steps, expected number of plots,
verbosity of plans, etc.) andtask-specific instructions(with
items like Task description , Data description ,
Data location , Metrics, Inputs, Outputs, and
Special instructions ). This makes DS tasks more
understandable to LLMs.
2.2. Interleaved text and code
Instead of expecting the LLM to directly emit a final
solution, say, like an optimized set of metrics, we make the
system generate a human-readable workflow with succinct,
numbered steps starting from data loading and all the way to
model card generation. Each“Step”consists of a plan and a
corresponding code snippet that implements this plan (Wang
et al., 2024), like a Jupyter notebook. We then have an output
with scrutable and reusable components like plans, code
snippets, data snapshots, error traces, and intermediate plots.
2.3. Agentic setup
Such a workflow is enabled by the use of agents, i.e.
different LLM instantiations with distinct prompts. We
have three agents: a main orchestrator, and sub-agents for
text and code generation. The orchestrator decides whether
to invoke the text/code generator (routing), or, seeing the
blocks generated so far, that thetask is complete. The calls
to the sub-agents usually alternate between text and code
like most Jupyter notebooks, but special situations may need
consecutive text or code blocks. All agents receive the same
context: the project summary, text and code snippets so far,
and outputs of code snippet execution (seehistory rendering
below for more details). They only vary in their responses:
the main agent emits a sub-agent call, while the sub-agents
emit text and code as per the current state of the workflow.
2.4. Tool calls
To prevent the orchestrator from generating free-form out-
put that needs to be parsed, we implement the code and text
generators as distinctfunctionsso that they becometoolsto
be called by the main agent2. This has been a special feature
in modern LLMs that highly facilitates building apps that
chain LLM agents together. Further, to prevent hallucinated
outputs like write_code when the correct function name
is request_code, we usestructured outputsby forcing
the orchestrator to output JSON as per our schema3.
The communication with our tools is schema-driven,
to prevent failures due to hallucinated responses by
the main agent. The difference between“spec”(for
request_text) and“purpose”(for request_code)
is intentional, and it reflects the different goals of the two
downstream agents (Text vs. Code). The Text Agent’s job
is to produce Markdown explanations – human-readable
commentary, analysis, or narration. The word“spec”(short
for specification) captures what the Orchestrator wants the
text to talk about – i.e., the topic or scope of the Markdown.
For example:
{
"action": "request_text",
"spec": "Explain how the model will be evaluated
and metrics that have to be computed."
}
The Text Agent writes a clear paragraph or bullet list about
evaluation metrics – not code (we can think of“spec”as a
creative or descriptive brief). The Code Agent must instead
produce executable Python code. The word“purpose”
indicates the goal or intent of that code cell — i.e., what this
code is meant to achieve. For example:
{
"action": "request_code",
"purpose": "Load the training and test datasets
into pandas DataFrames."
}
The Code Agent now generates the corresponding Python
code to achieve this (“purpose”is a functional or operational
2https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/
function-calling
3https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/
structured-outputs
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
CEDAR: Context Engineering for Agentic Data Science
Figure 1: The CEDAR system with three LLM agents, facilitating a human data scientist’s job.
instruction). The difference helps both downstream agents
interpret the Orchestrator’s intent unambiguously:
• the Text Agent focuses on narrative goals (explain,
summarize, discuss); and
• the Code Agent focuses on technical goals (load, process,
train, evaluate).
We could rename“spec”and“purpose”to a common field
like“instruction”, but then both downstream roles would
need logic to interpret that differently – which would make
the orchestration less explicit and a bit more error-prone.
The“finish”action is used when the Orchestrator decides
that the notebook or analysis has reached a natural stopping
point – the model has achieved its main goal and should wrap
up. The accompanying summary_hint (optional) gives
a short textual summary of what was achieved, key results,
or next steps to note in the final cell. For example:
{
"action": "finish",
"purpose": "Baseline logistic regression trained and
evaluated. Accuracy is about 0.72. No further
steps required."
}
The finish response does not invoke any downstream LLM,
but triggers the CEDAR app logic to create a final“Finished”
cell in the notebook. Use of structured outputs reduces the
amount of retries to solve specific sub-problems by separat-
ing routing from tool parametrization (Beurer-Kellner et al.,
2024). A summary of orchestrator responses is in Table 1.
2.5. Code for math and data handling
Generating Pythoncode for computationsfrees us from
dependence on an LLMs’ math capabilities. Another
significant advantage is thatdata stays local: the code
operates on local data, and only snapshots and aggregate
statistics are passed on to LLMs. We support on-premise
LLMs, so that even such data digests need not leave the user’s
system (in case working with sensitive data). We allow for
iterative code execution: when the execution of a particular
code block fails, the coder tool is prompted again with the
currenterror traceand a request to accordinglyrewritethe
code. This step adds robustness and enables recovery from
name/type mismatches and missed imports, for instance.
Safety. Docker is used to execute code inside containerized
runtime environments that isolate application processes from
other host processes, thereby reducing potential security
risks. Network access can be explicitly restricted through
Docker’s networking configuration to prevent unintended
data sharing or the execution of malicious external code. The
execution environment is based on pre-built Docker images
that include commonly used data science libraries and is
extended as required.
2.6. History rendering
This module takes the task history, i.e., the list of all
blocks so far (instructions, text, code, outputs, errors), as
input, and converts them into a compact, LLM-friendly text
summary as follows: (i) it appends user instructions; (ii) it
numbers each text/code block (Text #3 or Code #5 ) for
clarity and appends them in full as these are not very long
(only adding outputs and not raw code loses vital rationale
that led to these outputs). Actualcontext bottlenecksare code
outputs and error messages, as handled next; (iii) for past
code blocks, it adds only those that ran successfully; (iv) for
these“success”blocks, it adds onlyheadsof outputs as they
carry the most vital information; (v) if the latest code block
resulted in error, it adds thetailof the traceback instead, as
it pinpoints the error most specifically; (vi) if the history
so rendered exceeds10k characters (configurable), only the
most recent 10k are kept. This history is then passed on as
context to the agent being invoked at any given moment.
3. Demonstration walkthrough
3.1. Using the app
Fig. 2 shows CEDARsolving a canonical Kaggle
competition on LLM fine-tuning 4. A user first selects
4https://kaggle.com/competitions/
llm-classification-finetuning
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
CEDAR: Context Engineering for Agentic Data Science
Orchestrator output Handled by Meaning Key argument Output
request_textText Agent Generate the next Markdown cell
explaining results or outlining the
plan for the next step
spec7→Describes what to talk
about (topic, focus, or goal of the
text)
Explanatory Markdown block
(added as a“text”cell)
request_codeCode Agent Generate the next Python code cell
that performs a concrete task (e.g.
data load, training, evaluation)
purpose7→Explains what the
code should achieve
Executable Python code block
(added as a“code”cell, executed
immediately)
finishCEDAR App Logic Signal that the notebook is complete
– no more steps are needed
summary_hint7→Optional final
note summarizing results
Marks the session as finished, and
appends a final“finish”cell
Table 1: Explaining the use of Structured Outputs for possible orchestrator responses.
Figure 2: A screenshot of our CEDARapplication, solving a Kaggle competition on predicting better LLM responses.
LLMs for orchestrator, text generator, and coder agents
(GPT-4o via API, or Qwen3-Coder 30B5 locally via
ollama6). Qwen3-Coder was chosen as an alternative
as it was fine-tuned specifically for agentic coding. Next,
general (green) and task-specific instructions (blue) need
to be uploaded, instantly rendered as the “project summary”
in the broad middle panel. The broad right panel is reserved
for rendering the complete generated solution.
The user selects between“Next step”for inspecting a step
at a time, and“Autorun”to see the full solution at once (≃3
minutes for 10−20 steps). Steps can be“Reset”at any time.
3.2. Assets directory
An assets’ directory can be explored at any time during
or after the run: it stores the structured prompt, generated
5https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388
6https://ollama.com/library/qwen3-coder
plots (also rendered online in the app), metrics, the model
card and debug logs. We allow forexportingthe solution
as JSON, Markdown, or as a Jupyter notebook (making the
solution editable), andimportinga saved run as JSON. The
run can be continued from where we left off when the saved
JSON for a partially completed run is uploaded.
3.3. Configurations and debugging
The leftmost panel provides several knobs: (i) tem-
peratures for each of our agents (to transition between
response repeatability and diversity); (ii) maximum solution
steps (default 30, suitable for most Kaggle tasks); and (iii)
maximum code retries (default3, solves commonly observed
errors). Anautorun traceshows running summaries for
history rendering (the unpruned context is≃20k characters
towards the end). If default tool calls fail, (often the case
for Qwen3-Coder), we usetool emulation, forcing JSON
outputs. Diagnostics for GPT-4o API keys and Qwen3 server
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
CEDAR: Context Engineering for Agentic Data Science
connections help resolve authentication and network issues,
respectively. The context truncation limit (10k characters)
and the head/tail size of standard output and standard error
(20lines) can also be set via code.
3.4. Backend and frontend
Our backend is in pure Python and does not use any
special agent libraries. The frontend is built with Streamlit7.
CEDARcan run on any laptop, as long as the RAM allows
for loading the data in main memory. Qwen3-coder 30B is
hosted on a GPU server (4x48GB NVIDIA Ada 6000 RTX,
512 GB RAM, 64 virtual cores).
4. Concluding remarks
Through our contribution, we show that building an agen-
tic system pays off in the long run: the role of the human data
scientist shifts from tediously scripting repetitive workflows
to more cognitively rewarding tasks like structuring require-
ments, scrutinizing solutions, and suggesting optimizations.
Nevertheless, our focus here was on context engineering,
and agent complexity in CEDARis still rudimentary. Natural
next steps would introduce independent agents that inspect
a solution for faithfulness with respect to original user intent,
and critique generated solution workflows for improving
target metrics.
Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the Free State of Bavaria in
the DSgenAI project (Grant No.: RMF-SG20-3410-2-18-4).
We thank members of the NLP team at Fraunhofer IIS for
useful inputs at various stages of this work.
References
Beurer-Kellner, L., Fischer, M., and Vechev, M. Guiding
LLMs the right way: Fast, non-invasive constrained
generation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06988, 2024.
Chu, Z., Wang, S., Xie, J., Zhu, T., Yan, Y ., Ye, J., Zhong,
A., Hu, X., Liang, J., Yu, P. S., et al. LLM agents for
education: Advances and applications.arXiv, 2025.
Colle, B., Yukhymenko, H., and von Werra, L.
Jupyter Agents: training LLMs to reason with note-
books. https://huggingface.co/spaces/
lvwerra/jupyter-agent-2, 2025.
Grosnit, A., Maraval, A., Doran, J., Paolo, G., Thomas, A.,
Shahul Hameed Nabeezath Beevi, R., Gonzalez, J., Khan-
delwal, K., Iacobacci, I., Benechehab, A., et al. Large lan-
7https://streamlit.io
guage models orchestrating structured reasoning achieve
Kaggle grandmaster level.arXiv, pp. arXiv–2411, 2024.
Guo, S., Deng, C., Wen, Y ., Chen, H., Chang, Y ., and Wang,
J. DS-Agent: Automated data science by empowering
large language models with case-based reasoning.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.17453, 2024.
He, J., Ghosh, R., Walia, K., Chen, J., Dhadiwal, T.,
Hazel, A., and Inguva, C. Frontiers of large language
model-based agentic systems-construction, efficacy and
safety. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
CIKM, pp. 5526–5529, 2024.
Hong, S., Lin, Y ., Liu, B., Liu, B., Wu, B., Zhang, C., Wei, C.,
Li, D., Chen, J., Zhang, J., et al. Data interpreter: An LLM
agent for data science.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18679,
2024.
Jing, L., Huang, Z., Wang, X., Yao, W., Yu, W., Ma, K.,
Zhang, H., Du, X., and Yu, D. DSBench: How Far
are Data Science Agents from Becoming Data Science
Experts?arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07703, 2024.
Maojun, S., Han, R., Jiang, B., Qi, H., Sun, D., Yuan, Y ., and
Huang, J. A survey on large language model-based agents
for statistics and data science.The American Statistician,
pp. 1–21, 2025.
Qiu, J., Lam, K., Li, G., Acharya, A., Wong, T. Y ., Darzi, A.,
Yuan, W., and Topol, E. J. LLM-based agentic systems
in medicine and healthcare.Nature Machine Intelligence,
6(12):1418–1420, 2024.
Wang, X., Chen, Y ., Yuan, L., Zhang, Y ., Li, Y ., Peng, H., and
Ji, H. Executable code actions elicit better LLM agents. In
Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML, 2024.
5
