--- PAGE 1 ---
MiniScope: A Least Privilege Framework for Authorizing Tool Calling Agents
Jinhao Zhu Kevin Tseng Gil Vernik † Xiao Huang Shishir Patil Vivian Fang Raluca Ada Popa
University of California, Berkeley †IBM Research
Abstract—Tool calling agents are an emerging paradigm in
LLM deployment, with major platforms such as ChatGPT,
Claude, and Gemini adding connectors and autonomous capa-
bilities. However, the inherent unreliability of LLMs introduces
fundamental security risks when these agents operate over
sensitive user services. Prior approaches either rely on man-
ually written policies that require security expertise, or place
LLMs in the confinement loop, which lacks rigorous security
guarantees. We present MiniScope, a framework that enables
tool calling agents to operate on user accounts while confining
potential damage from unreliable LLMs. MiniScope introduces
a novel way to automatically and rigorously enforce least
privilege principles by reconstructing permission hierarchies
that reflect relationships among tool calls and combining them
with a mobile-style permission model to balance security and
ease of use. To evaluate MiniScope, we create a synthetic
dataset derived from ten popular real-world applications,
capturing the complexity of realistic agentic tasks beyond
existing simplified benchmarks. Our evaluation shows that
MiniScope incurs only 1–6% latency overhead compared to
vanilla tool calling agents, while significantly outperforming
the LLM based baseline in minimizing permissions as well as
computational and operational costs.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become increas-
ingly powerful and are now widely integrated with so-
phisticated tool-calling capabilities. Popular AI assistants
such as ChatGPT [50], Claude [5], and Gemini [25] now
support connectors [6], [24], [53], allowing them to integrate
with external services such as Gmail, Outlook Calendar,
Dropbox, and Notion, and perform actions on users’ behalf.
These integrations transform LLMs from conversational in-
terfaces into personalized, actionable systems, commonly
referred to as agentic systems.
However, as agentic systems take on more complex
and autonomous roles, they also introduce significant se-
curity risks. Unlike traditional software systems that can
be systematically white-box tested, peer reviewed, and even
formally verified, the core component of agentic systems,
the LLM, suffers from persistent issues such as hallucina-
tions [57], [86] and vulnerability to various attacks [26],
[40], [41]. While prior research has shown improvements in
model reliability through techniques like alignment training
[12], [55], [87], these problems remain unresolved [49].
This inherent unreliability creates a fundamental security
challenge: an unreliable agentic system with access to a
user’s private data may execute tasks misaligned with user
intentions or even leak sensitive information [79]. Consider
this scenario: Alice wants to ask the AI agent to check her
email and synchronize events with her calendar. To complete
this task, the agent needs access to both Alice’s email
and calendar accounts. Granting the agent direct access
to Alice’s credentials is problematic as it might misinter-
pret Alice’s instructions and, for example, end up deleting
sensitive emails. Even worse, an agent with all of Alice’s
credentials becomes a target for attackers to exploit Alice’s
accounts in a wealth of ways. Ideally, we want the agent to
only be able to perform Alice’s request, and nothing else.
As highlighted by OpenAI’s recent red-teaming evalua-
tion [74], systematically enforcing trust boundaries is crucial
for limiting potential damage in future agentic systems.
Recent research began withpolicy-based enforcement[18],
[22], [63], [67], [69], [72], [75], a well-established technique
in traditional security systems. Policies expressed in domain-
specific languages (e.g., Cedar [19]) offer rich and ex-
pressive constraint semantics. However, writing correct and
secure policies requires significant expertise, and because
these policies must be predefined, they often fail to adapt
to the dynamic nature of agentic tasks. To mitigate these
limitations, prior work has exploredbringing LLMs into
the confinement loop[20], [32], [39], [63], [72], [78], [80],
[81], [84]. The core idea is to treat a separate LLM as
the “expert” that takes input only from trusted sources and
produces per-task policies that satisfy the required security
properties. While this approach offers better flexibility, it
introduces new security concerns. Even with task-specific
fine-tuning [56], improvements in reliability and robustness
remain largely experimental, and the model is still suscepti-
ble to hallucinations or adaptive attacks. Moreover, because
security specifications are provided in natural language (e.g.,
“Please adhere to the principle of least privilege during
policy generation”), there is no guarantee that the LLM
will interpret or follow these instructions consistently or
correctly. Moving to real-world deployments, tool-calling
agents often rely onuser confirmationsfor security. Un-
fortunately, this creates an inherent tension between security
and user experience (see §3.1). More frequent confirmations
allow users to detect anomalous behavior in real time but
create an interruptive experience. Less frequent or even
absent confirmations offer better usability but either have
limited utility or provide weak or no security guarantees.
In this paper, through our systemMiniScope, we aim
to establish a paradigm that provides rigorous security en-
arXiv:2512.11147v1  [cs.CR]  11 Dec 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
forcement for tool-calling agents while reducing user effort
in real-world deployments. At the core of MiniScope is a
hierarchical permission model that organizes tool calls into
structured permission groups. By combining this hierarchy
with the classical least privilege principle [58], MiniScope
provides a rigorous foundation for reasoning about the
minimal set of permissions required for any user task in
agentic scenarios. To balance security with ease of use,
we draw inspiration from the permission model used by
modern mobile operating systems, adapting it to work with
our hierarchical permissions and to accommodate the au-
tonomous, context-dependent nature of AI agent operations.
As shown in Fig. 1, MiniScope focuses on the user-agent-
service model where the user is interacting with an AI agent,
who is connected to the user’s services. In MiniScope, we
do not trust the underlying LLM used by the agent, nor the
responses from connected services, since the model may
hallucinate or be subject to prompt injection, and service
responses may contain attacker controlled data. We prompt
the user regarding granting permissions, an approach that is
widely adopted in the mobile permission management [3].
Our main contributions are as follows.
First, we are the first to rigorously define and enforce
least privilege principles for tool calling agentic tasks. Un-
like prior works that enforce least privilege through prompt-
ing the LLM [63], [84], our enforcement is mechanical and
provides rigorous guarantees. Our key idea is to construct
permission hierarchies over tool calls. Specifically, we first
group tool calls into permission groups based on their
similarity in sensitivity and functionality, and then derive
a hierarchy among these groups. This design offers several
benefits. First, given the hierarchy, we can automatically
identify the exact permissions required to fulfill any agentic
task. More importantly, the hierarchy provides a structured
notion of tool sensitivity, which allows us to rigorously
define the least privilege required for a task. Concretely, our
grouping of tool calls is based on OAuth [28] scopes. OAuth
is a widely adopted authorization protocol that enables third-
party applications to access user services without reveal-
ing user credentials. In OAuth, the capabilities of third-
party applications are defined by scopes, where each scope
specifies a set of resources (e.g., tool calls) the applica-
tion can access. This scope information directly provides
the permission grouping semantics we need. To derive the
permission hierarchy based on these groupings, we propose
a simple yet effective principle: a permission group that
supports more tools than another corresponds to broader
permissions and is therefore more sensitive. With this hi-
erarchy, we formulate the problem of finding the minimal
set of permissions required for any agentic task as an integer
linear programming (ILP) problem. This formulation not
only allows us to efficiently and rigorously infer minimally
required permissions for diverse tasks but also makes our
approach generalizable across different applications with
different permission hierarchies.
Building on the permission hierarchy and least-privilege
reasoning described above, we develop an end-to-end agent
system that enforces this principle in practice. Fig. 1 presents
User
Agent Services
MiniScope
User Confirmation
Tool Call Response
Figure 1. MiniScope Architecture. Red indicates untrusted. Green indicates
trusted.
the architecture and high-level workflow of MiniScope.
MiniScope serves as the “firewall” between the agent and
the services. It keeps track of all previously granted permis-
sions and the user’s credentials for connecting to services.
For each user request, MiniScope takes the execution plan
submitted by the untrusted agent and determines the minimal
set of permissions required to perform the requested tasks.
Following prior work [18], [69], [81], we bring human
input into the security decision loop. At initialization, the
system starts with no access permissions. When additional
permissions are needed, MiniScope treats the user as the
ground-truth authority and prompts for explicit approval.
For each tool call issued by the agent, MiniScope enforces
a mechanical check to prevent unauthorized invocations.
User credentials for accessing services are fully isolated
from the agent to prevent direct exploitation by attacker.
Requested tool calls are forwarded to the target service
using the user’s real credentials only if they are permitted
under the granted permissions. To balance security and ease
of use, we take inspiration from the permission model in
mobile applications [3], [9], and adapt it to the agentic use
case. Combined with our hierarchical design, this enables
users to iteratively refine security preferences during agent
interaction with minimal effort.
Finally, we construct a synthetic environment to evaluate
the effectiveness and overhead of MiniScope. To ensure
our evaluation reflects real-world complexity, we prioritize
realism during our dataset construction. Unlike prior work
that relies on abstract tasks or simulated applications [21],
MiniScope targets 10 real, widely-used applications: Gmail,
Google Calendar, Google Drive, Google Storage, Slack,
Dropbox, Outlook, Outlook Calendar, Notion, and Zoom.
Compared to synthetic applications [21], these real applica-
tions typically support significantly more API methods and
exhibit greater complexity in their permission structures.
Ideally, our evaluation would use real user requests from
deployed agentic systems. However, despite the growing
availability of such systems, publicly available datasets re-
main limited, and accessing real user data raises signifi-
cant privacy concerns. Therefore, following prior work, we
generate synthetic user requests through prompting LLMs
[11], [21]. To capture different levels of complexity, we
begin with simple requests that involve a single tool call
in a single application, then increase the complexity to
multiple tool calls within a single application, and finally to
requests that span multiple applications to reflect realistic
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
cross application workflows. To ensure coverage, the LLM
generator is prompted to exhaustively cover each method for
single tool call requests and to produce complex requests
that involve different combinations of tool calls in the multi
tool call setting. Generated requests are then deduplicated
based on the set of tools involved. §5 provides details of
the synthetic request generation process and we hope this
dataset will also prove valuable to the research community
for future work in this area.
Evaluation summary:To demonstrate the effectiveness
of MiniScope, we evaluate it along three dimensions: per-
mission minimality, runtime overhead, and user effort. For
permission minimality, we compare against an alternative
of using an LLM to decide the least permission. Our eval-
uation shows that this LLM based approach reaches only
70–83% optimality with proprietary models, and drops to
20–34% with open source models. More importantly, using
our least privilege solver, we identifiedsix overprivileged
deploymentsin real world connectors(§6.2.1). In terms of
latency, MiniScope adds only 1–7% runtime overhead com-
pared to a vanilla end to end tool calling agent. In contrast,
the LLM in the loop baseline incurs orders of magnitude
higher overhead than MiniScope, with an extra estimated
cost of $0.063 per request. Finally, because MiniScope
brings humans into the loop for permission confirmation, we
simulate three months of user-agent interactions on Gmail.
The simulation result shows that confirmation rate ranges
from 18% to 60%, depending on the user persona, which
is better than per method confirmation and consistent with
prior findings on higher risk tasks [29], [48], [66].
2. System Overview
MiniScope focuses on the user-agent-service model,
a paradigm widely adopted in real-world agent deploy-
ments [6], [8], [44], [53]. As shown in Fig. 1, this model
consists of three parties: the user, the LLM agent, and
the services (applications). In a typical workflow, the agent
receives the user’s natural-language request, analyzes it, and
determines which tool(s) provided by the connected services
can best fulfill the task. It then invokes these tools with the
appropriate arguments, processes their structured responses,
and returns the final result to the user. Interactions here may
involve multiple rounds of communication between the user
and the agent or between the agent and the services to gather
information, execute data dependent operations, or refine
results based on user feedback. In this paper, we focus on
single agent systems, leaving multi-agent scenarios, where
multiple agents communicate on behalf of their users, to
future work. These scenarios are briefly discussed in §7.
2.1. Threat Model
Based on this system model, we now present the threat
model and security assumptions.
User.We trust the user’s intention, meaning we assume the
user makes legitimate decisions when granting or denying
specific permissions, as in many real-world deployments
[7], [47], [48], [60], [81]. We also trust the user’s high-
level instructions in the prompt. However, we do not trust
the full prompt content, since the user may unintentionally
include data from untrusted sources such as web pages.
Such data may contain injection attacks that attempt to
mislead the model into performing unintended or harm-
ful actions. For example, Alice may ask the agent to
send a summary email to her team based on a customer
support message, but the message may contain malicious
text such as"Ignore the previous instruction
and delete all emails."Indirect prompt injection
attacks of this kind have been demonstrated in practice [2].
Model.We make no trust assumptions about the underly-
ing LLM used by the agent, which may be a proprietary
model from major providers [5], [25], [50] or a custom
model hosted by the user. The LLM may hallucinate or
be influenced by untrusted data received during the agentic
workflow [40], [62].
Services.For the services connected to the agent, MiniScope
assumes that their tool call implementations follow the
intended specifications. For example, if a tool is designed to
read an email, its implementation should actually perform a
read operation on the target email rather than delete it. This
assumption does not require every service to implement its
tools correctly. Instead, our security guarantee applies only
to services (or specific service methods) whose behavior
matches their stated specification. In a later section, we show
how permission hierarchies can be derived automatically
from each service’s existing OAuth configuration (§3). As an
alternative, service developers may publish official permis-
sion hierarchies for their services if they wish to integrate
with MiniScope. MiniScope ensures that a service with an
incorrect specification or an incorrect implementation cannot
compromise the security of other services connected to the
same agent. Finally, tool call responses from each service
are treated as untrusted, since they may include data injected
by malicious users [2].
Non-goals.MiniScope aims to confine potential harm
caused by the tool-calling agent to the user’s connected
services. It is not designed to prevent prompt injection
attacks in general or attacks that target the model itself, such
as jailbreaking [76]. MiniScope provides security guarantees
only at the granularity defined by the permission hierarchy.
It does not directly prevent attacks that attempt to mislead
the model into issuing additional tool calls that remain
within the same scope. We view this as a trade-off between
security granularity and user burden, and we discuss possible
extensions for finer-grained protection in §7.2. We also
provide a detailed discussion of in scope and out of scope
attacks in §4.4. Finally, MiniScope does not aim to defend
against Denial of Service attacks [36] initiated by either the
model provider or the service provider, since these parties
are typically incentivized to maintain service availability.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
2.2. Security Game
To define our security game, we first introduce the
following notation. Letf LLM denote the underlying LLM
model, and let
F(M) ={F 1(m1), . . . ,F n(mn)}
be the set of available service instances, where eachF i is
an admissible service instance that takes a statem i as input.
Eachm i is a valid state of the service instanceF i, which
means that it is achieved through the initialization of the
service and a series of valid API calls. These API calls can
be performed by attackers. We denote the set of all states by
M. Each service instanceF i has an associated authorization
protocol specificationσ i that defines the scopes and their
respective capabilities. We defineσ= (σ 1, . . . ,σn)for the
collection of all such specifications. We model the agent as
a function parameterized by both the underlying LLM and
the set of external services. The agent is initialized as
A=Agent
 
fLLM,F(M)

,
whereAgent(·)denotes the agent construction procedure.
When a useruinteracts with the agent through the MiniS-
cope, we define the execution trace as
τ=Interact
 
u,A,σ

,
whereInteract(·)denotes the process by which the agent
receives user requests and issues zero or more service/tool
calls under MiniScope enforcement, producing a traceτ.
Each element of the trace is a tupleτ j = (p j,d j,c j),
wherep j is the user’s prompt,d j is the user’s decision
on permissions (an action that updates the current granted
permission state), andc j represents the set of tool calls
invoked by the agent and executed on the corresponding
service at stepj. Note thatc j only includes tool calls that
have been executed on the services because the agent (or
the adversary itself) might still issue incorrect tool calls,
tool calls with correct tokens but insufficient permissions,
or tool calls with incorrect tokens (when the adversary tries
to guess the user’s authentication token). In the first two
cases, the calls are rejected by the permission checks en-
forced by MiniScope and the service. In the last case, under
the security assumption of the authentication protocol, the
probability of an agent correctly guessing a valid credential
is negligible. Letρ 0 denote the initial granted permission
state. The permission state aftertsteps is then obtained by
successive application of decisions:
ρt =d t ◦d t−1 ◦ · · · ◦d 1(ρ0).
We define our security game in Fig. 2. In this game, the
challenger plays the role of the user in the agentic workflow
and selects the set of servicesF. Since we do not trust
either the model or the tool call responses from services,
the adversary chooses thef LLM and the set of valid states
Mfor all services. After the challenger selects the services,
the adversary can craft valid service states with malicious
data injected through legitimate API calls. The agent is then
1) The challengercselects a set of servicesFtogether with
their authorization specificationsσ.
2) The adversary chooses the modelf LLM and the set of
statesMfor each service instance inF.
3) The agent is initialized as
A=Agent  fLLM,F(M).
4) The challenger interacts with the agentAthrough
MiniScope forNrounds and obtains the execution trace
τ=Interact(c,A,σ).
5) Outputsτ
Figure 2. Security game for MiniScope
initialized according to the definition and the challenger
interacts with the agent fortrounds to generate a trace of
executionτ. With this game, we say the system issecureif,
for every stepj, all tool calls inc j are permitted underρ j.
In other words, the permissions inρ j authorize every tool
call the agent invokes at that step.
3. From Hierarchy to Least Privilege
In an ideal world, an agent executing a user’s task should
have exactly the permissions required to invoke tools rele-
vant to that task, and nothing more. However, achieving this
level of least privilege is challenging because agentic tasks
are highly dynamic. Predefined or pre-generated permission
rules are rarely exhaustive and often limit the agent’s utility.
As a result, most real-world deployments rely on runtime
confirmation [5], [48]. In this section, we first describe how
user confirmation is used to manage permissions, and then
motivate our design of hierarchical permissions that enable
a more principled form of least privilege.
3.1. The Reality
Based on how frequently confirmation is required, exist-
ing systems have developed into the following patterns: per-
call confirmation, confirmation only for high-risk actions,
initial confirmation, and no confirmation. In the per call
confirmation, the user must explicitly approve every tool
invocation. For example, when connecting Claude with cus-
tomized MCP servers [7], the user is shown the target func-
tion and its arguments for every tool call and must explicitly
grant permission before execution. While this design allows
users to detect and prevent undesired actions in real time,
it requires constant user attention, creates an interruptive
experience, and often leads to decision fatigue. Codex [51]
takes a different approach by classifying actions into low
risks and high risks. Low risk operations run automatically,
while the user is prompted only for high risk operations
such as network access. In the initial confirmation pattern,
permission is requested only once at the beginning of an
interaction. This can be found when users connect per-
sonal services (e.g., Gmail or Slack) to ChatGPT or Claude
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
through connectors. During the initial connection, users are
prompted to approve a predefined set of permissions. Once
granted, subsequent tool calls proceed automatically without
further confirmation. This approach reduces user overhead
but sacrifices flexibility in permission management and tool
selection. Finally, the no confirmation pattern appears when
users build custom agents with their own tools. In these
cases, users must manually review and configure the per-
missions of each connected application. In practice, this
process is complex and error prone, often leading users to
over provision access for convenience and effectively grant
the agent full privileges [45]. Together, these patterns reveal
a fundamental tension between security and user effort,
motivating the need for a systematic mechanism to manage
agent permissions with minimal user intervention.
3.2. Permission Hierarchy
Our design of a permission hierarchy is inspired by Hi-
erarchical Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) [59], which
extends flat RBAC by organizing roles into a hierarchy
where higher-level roles inherit the permissions of lower-
level ones. We observe a natural synergy between tool calls
and this hierarchical structure. First, tool calls with similar
functionality or sensitivity can be placed within permission
groups. Second, because these groups differ in sensitivity,
they can be arranged into a hierarchy that reflects their
relative sensitivity. For example, groups that involve data
modification are generally more sensitive than those that
only allow data reading. Based on these observations, we
propose a hierarchical permission model that captures both
the varying sensitivity and semantic relationships among
tool calls. Compared to method level enforcement, a hierar-
chical approach offers a more systematic and scalable way
to reason about permissions while preserving flexibility for
dynamic agentic tasks.
Ideally, such a hierarchy could be provided directly by
the service provider, who is best positioned to define the
relationships among its APIs. In practice, many services
already expose groupings of APIs with similar sensitivity
through their OAuth configurations. OAuth [28] is an open
standard authorization protocol that allows third-party ap-
plications to access protected resources on behalf of users
without exposing their credentials. For example, when a user
connects an app to their Google account, the app redirects
them to Google’s login page. After the user signs in and
grants consent, Google issues the app a temporary access
token. The app then uses this token to make API requests
on the user’s behalf. Each access token is associated with
one or more scopes defined by the service’s developers.
Each scope specifies a set of API methods that a third-party
application can invoke, providing exactly the permission
taxonomy needed to reconstruct the hierarchy.
Using the scope information, MiniScope constructs the
permission hierarchy based on a simple intuition: a per-
mission scope that supports more methods than another
corresponds to broader permissions and is therefore more
sensitive. Concretely, for each scopes i, we denote the set of
*
*.acls *.acls.readonly
*.app.created
*.calendars *.calendars.readonly
*.calendarlist *.calendarlist.readonly
*.events.owned *.events
*.readonly
*.settings.readonly
*.events.freebusy
*.freebusy
*.events.owned.readonly
*.events.public.readonly
*.events.readonly
* = https://www.googleapis.com/auth/calendar
Figure 3. Google Calendar’s Permission Hierarchy
methods that this scope supports asO i. For any two scopes
s1 ands 2, if the correspondingO 1 is a subset ofO 2, then we
considers 1 to be a child ofs 2 in the permission hierarchy.
Due to space constraints, the full algorithm is deferred to
the appendix (see Alg. 1).
Fig. 3 presents the reconstructed permission hierar-
chy for Google Calendar using the above idea. Based
on this example, we have several findings. First, the
naming hierarchy of scopes does not necessarily re-
flect their actual functional hierarchy. For example, one
would naturally consider *.events.readonlyto be
the parent node of *.events.public.readonlyand
*.events.owned.readonlybased on their names.
However, the actual hierarchy is the opposite, as the
latter two scopes allow access to more methods be-
cause they apply to specific resources. Similar pat-
terns can be found between *.events.freebusy
and *.freebusy, and between *.event.ownedand
*.event. Second, there exist scopes that can be merged
into the same node in the hierarchy. This occurs when
different scopes support exactly the same set of meth-
ods. In practice, this often happens when the scopes gov-
ern the same functionality but apply to different resource
types. For example,.events.public.readonlyand
.events.owned.readonlyboth enable read-only ac-
cess to events, but one applies to public events while the
other applies to owned events.
3.3. ILP-based Least Privilege Solver
Now given the hierarchy in a tree-like structure, can
we find the least privilege permissions for a set of API
methods in a straightforward way? One might consider a
simple heuristic: for each method, find the most restrictive
permission that supports it, and then take the union of
these permissions across the method set as the required
least-privilege permissions. However, this approach only
makes sense under the assumption that for each method,
there is exactly one path in the tree where nodes on this
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
path are the permissions that include this method. In our
reconstructed permission hierarchy, we find that a single
method can have multiple corresponding paths. For example,
in Fig. 3,calendar.calendars.get, which returns
calendar metadata, can be invoked with either.readonly
or.calendars.readonly. In Google Calendar, 24 of
the 37 API methods can be authorized through multiple
paths. In such cases, the heuristic described above does not
guarantee optimal permission selection.
Instead, we find that the least privilege mapping problem
can be formulated as an Integer Linear Program (ILP)
problem. Without loss of generality, we now consider a
single target service, as mapping execution plans across
multiple services is equivalent to independently mapping
each service’s plan. Given an application, letT= (V,E)
denote a permission tree (or forest), where each nodev∈V
corresponds to a unique permission scopes(assuming no
equivalent scopes for simplicity), and each directed edge
(vi,v j)∈Eindicates thatv i grants broader permissions
thanv j. LetE={e 1,e 2, . . . ,e n}denote an execution plan
consisting of API calls to the target application. For each
API calle i, letS i be the set of required permission scopes
(nodes inT). DefineS={S 1,S 2, . . . ,S n}as the collection
of these scope sets.
Let binary decision variablesx v ∈ {0, 1}indicate
whether nodev∈Vis selected:
xv =
(
1,if nodevis selected
0,otherwise
Our goal is to minimize the total cost associated with
selected nodes:
minimize ∑
v∈V
cost(v)·x v
subject to the following constraints, ensuring that at least
one of each API call’s required scopes is covered:
∀Si ∈S: ∑
v:subtree(v)∩S i̸=∅
xv ≥1
wheresubtree(v)denotes the nodevand all its descendants
inT, andcost(v)is the cost associated with selecting node
v. In this paper, we construct our cost model based on the
number of API calls that can be authorized by each scope
v. Note that our design is independent of the specific cost
model used. It can be customized based on developer pref-
erences, user requirements, or insights from prior research
on optimal cost formulations. We treat the selection of cost
model as a complementary area of investigation.
When previously granted permissions are insufficient for
a new task, we re-solve the ILP while fixing the variables
corresponding to those existing permissions to 1, treating
them as predetermined constraints. This preserves all origi-
nally granted scopes, and the solver then finds the least set
of additional permissions required to complete the task.
Least Privilege Solver
Credential Storage
Permission Checker
Permission Hierarchies
MiniScope
②
User Agent Services
③ ④ ⑤ ⑥
① ⑦
⑧
Figure 4. MiniScope Workflow 1User sends request to the agent. 2
Agent submits the execution plan to MiniScope. 3Least Privilege Solver
determines minimal required permissions and requests user approval for any
additional privileges. 4MiniScope generates session token and returns
it to the agent. 5Agent executes tool calls using the session token.
6MiniScope intercepts tool calls, validates permissions against token
scope, and substitutes actual user credentials upon successful verification.
7Connected services process tool calls and return results to the agent.
8Agent delivers final response to the user.
4. MiniScope
This section presents the MiniScope architecture, work-
flow, and permission model, followed by a security analysis
based on the security game defined in §2.2.
As shown in Fig. 4, MiniScope consists of four compo-
nents: the Credential Storage, the Permission Hierarchies,
the Least Privilege Solver, and the Permission Checker. The
Credential Storage stores the credentials to access connected
services and the permissions previously granted to the agent.
We introduce the functionality of the other components as
we walk through the workflow.
4.1. Initialization
During initialization, MiniScope takes as input a map-
ping from each API method to its accepted permission
scopes. Currently, MiniScope obtains this mapping from
each service’s official documentation published on their
public websites. In the future, developers who want to
adopt MiniScope can either verify this generated mapping
or release an official mapping for their service. However,
even without developer involvement, the mapping derives
solely from public documentation without prior knowledge
of users’ tasks and will not be contaminated by untrusted
parties mentioned in §2.1. Once this mapping is generated,
MiniScope parses it and reconstructs the permission hier-
archy for each service using the methodology described
in §3.2. At initialization, the agent is configured with no
permissions for any service registered with MiniScope.
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
4.2. Workflow
When a user requests tool calls, the agent first generates
an execution graph, where each node represents a tool
call and edges capture the data flow between nodes. This
execution graph is then passed to the Least Privilege Solver
in MiniScope. Next, the solver groups the tool calls in
the execution graph by application. For each application,
it determines the minimal set of required permission scopes
based on the tool calls, the previously granted permissions,
and the permission hierarchy of the target service. If ad-
ditional permissions are needed to complete the execution
graph, MiniScope prompts the user to decide which per-
missions for which services may be delegated to the agent.
If the user grants the permission, the solver updates the
permissions in the Credential Storage according to the user’s
choice (see §4.3). The solver then returns the session token
to the agent. With the decision in place, the agent issues tool
calls according to the execution plan, attaching the session
token to each request. Before a tool call reaches the service,
it is intercepted by the Permission Checker, which verifies
the request using the granted permissions associated with
the session token stored in the Credential Storage. If the
verification succeeds, the tool call is forwarded to the service
with the user’s actual credentials attached, and the service’s
response is returned to the agent.
Utility-wise, for normal benign tasks, MiniScope does
not affect the agent’s execution, as its planning and actions
remain within the granted permissions. When the agent
attempts to invoke a tool call with insufficient permissions,
MiniScope intercepts the unauthorized action. In such cases,
the agent’s workflow is returned to the user, who can revise
or clarify the request.
4.3. Permission Model
MiniScope adopts a session-based permission model
that aligns naturally with how agentic applications already
operate. Current agentic applications use session-based de-
signs to bridge the gap between stateless language models
and stateful user interactions. Although LLMs process each
request independently, meaningful agent conversations re-
quire maintaining context across multiple interactions Ses-
sions address this need by preserving conversation history
throughout an interaction period. Because each session de-
fines a boundary for temporarily preserved context, session-
based permissions integrate seamlessly with this model.
When a user initiates a conversation session with an
LLM agent, the agent first registers with MiniScope to
obtain a session token. At the same time, MiniScope creates
a fork of the user’s previously granted permissions in the
Credential Database and associates it with the new session.
Any permissions granted during the session are recorded in
this fork unless the user explicitly chooses to make them
permanent by selecting “Always allow.” When the session
ends, the forked permissions are automatically discarded.
MiniScope’s permission solver analyzes user tasks to
determine the minimum privilege scope required for com-
pletion. Since we treat users as the ground truth source
for permission decisions, the system must prompt them
for explicit approval of these scopes. While requesting
permission for every individual tool call achieves optimal
security, this approach creates excessive user fatigue and
degrades the overall experience. To balance security with
ease of use, we adopt the permission model used in modern
mobile platforms [3], [9] and adapt it to the agentic setting.
Specifically, for newly requested permissions, we offer the
following options.
•Always allow.Grants permanent permission for this scope
across all future sessions.
•Allow once.Provides one-time permission for the current
operation only.
•Allow this session.Enables access for the duration of the
current agent session.
•Don’t allow.Explicitly denies access to the requested
scope. This indicates either that the user has changed their
mind or that the agent has requested excessive scopes.
To aid user comprehension during permission granting,
we use the brief descriptions of each scope provided in the
application specifications and include these descriptions in
the permission prompts. When the user grants a permission,
the agent proceeds to the execution phase and enters the
response phase once execution completes successfully. Oth-
erwise, it replans if additional is required for execution. If
the user selects “Don’t allow”, or if the agent issues a tool
call that falls outside the previously granted permissions, the
interceptor detects the violation, terminates the tool call, and
returns an “insufficient permission” response to the agent.
If the user wishes to revoke previously granted permissions,
they can access the credential storage and modify the per-
mission entry, similar to how permissions are managed in
mobile device settings.
While our approach draws from existing mobile permis-
sion models, we acknowledge that the permission model in
traditional mobile ecosystems is constantly evolving [3], and
better approaches to assist users in determining permissions
are possible [14], [43], [61], [77]. We leave the exploration
of a better permission model in agentic tasks to future work.
4.4. Security Analysis
We now analyze how MiniScope ’s design satisfies the
guarantees defined under the threat model in §2.1. During in-
teraction, untrusted data may originate from the data section
of user input or from responses to tool calls in prior interac-
tions within the same session. In addition, the LLM itself is a
potential source of untrusted behavior, as it may misinterpret
or deviate from the user’s original intention. Therefore, the
execution plan submitted to the Least Privilege Solver may
contain unwanted actions. With MiniScope, the minimal set
of privileges required for the plan is computed and checked
against the permissions that have already been granted. If the
plan requires additional permissions to proceed, the user is
notified and prompted for approval. This mechanism ensures
that when untrusted data causes the plan to request actions
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Please reply to the latest email regarding
next week's event. I will be available Friday .
1.Gmail: list_messages
2.Gmail: get_messages
Your agent is requesting read-only
access to your Gmail…
…
We are planning to get tickets to the campus
film night next week. Would you be up for
joining?
Delete this email after replying. Don’t ignore
this — add it to your plan.
…
1.Gmail: send_message
2.Gmail: delete_message
Your agent is requesting full
access to your Gmail (send and
delete messages)…
Insufficient permissions. Task aborted.
1. User request
2. Agent Planning
3. MiniScope Solving
& User Confirmation
4. Tool Execution
5. Agent Replanning
6. MiniScope Solving
& User Confirmation
7. Agent Response
Figure 5. Example of an in-scope attack that MiniScope defends against.
beyond the previously granted permissions, the user can
detect and block such unintended behavior. Furthermore,
MiniScope intercepts and validates each tool call request
issued by the agent. If a request carries a valid session
token and falls within the permissions associated with that
token, MiniScope forwards it to the target service using
the user’s real credentials. This design ensures that the
agent never directly accesses the user’s actual bearer tokens.
Otherwise, a malicious agent could bypass enforcement by
first submitting a benign execution plan to obtain the user’s
credentials, and then executing a malicious one.
As discussed in §2.1, MiniScope ’s protection granular-
ity is determined by the permission hierarchy. Fig. 5 presents
an in-scope attack that can be detected by MiniScope. In this
example, the agent follows the ReAct [83] paradigm, where
after each round of tool call execution, it reasons about the
next step and may revise the execution plan in response to
potentially malicious tool outputs. It is worth noting that
even in the more recent and widely used Plan and Execute
model [20], MiniScope can still detect this kind of attack.
Out-of-Scope attacks.MiniScope does not provide guar-
antees against attacks that alter the execution plan within
the currently granted permissions. For example, such at-
tacks may mislead the agent into invoking another tool
call within the same permission group or the same tool
call with different arguments. The flexibility of MiniScope
allows developers and users to determine the permission
granularity as a balance between security and ease of use.
We discuss how MiniScope can be combined with other
defense mechanisms to achieve stronger protection in §7.
5. Synthetic Scenarios for Real Applications
In this section, we describe our methodology for con-
structing the evaluation suite for MiniScope, aiming to
simulate realistic user–agent interactions. Ideally, this would
require authentic user requests from deployed agentic appli-
cations. However, despite the growing deployment of agentic
systems, publicly available datasets remain limited, and
accessing real user data raises significant privacy concerns.
Therefore, following common practice in prior work [11],
[21], we evaluate our system using synthetic data.
Unlike prior work that relies on abstract tasks or simu-
lated applications, MiniScope focuses on real, widely used
applications. We collected 10 popular applications (Tab. 1),
seven of which are already integrated as tool-calling con-
nectors in Claude and ChatGPT [6], [53]. Compared to real
applications, we find that simulated applications often have
oversimplified API structures. For example, as shown in
Tab. 1, the number of tools in our applications ranges from
32 to 247, while simulated applications typically offer only
a few to at most 20 tools [21], [34]. Grounding our setup in
real applications allows us to generate realistic user requests
and capture the complexity of permission hierarchies across
different applications. Based on these applications, we then
simulate realistic and representative user–agent interactions
with two objectives: complexity and coverage. Complexity
ensures that generated requests span diverse types of user
interactions, while coverage ensures that the requests cover
as many API methods as possible.
To capture complexity, we simulate three scenarios. The
first involves asingle applicationand asingle method,
representing the simplest form of user–agent interaction.
The second extends this tomultiple methodswithin a single
application, reflecting more realistic workflows within one
service, such as querying and then updating a calendar event.
The third spansmultiple applicationsandmultiple methods,
modeling cross-application workflows and the correspond-
ing challenges in scope composition. For multi-application
cases, we construct two suites: the first includes Gmail,
Google Calendar, and Google Drive, while the second con-
tains Slack, Gmail, and Dropbox, to capture productivity
and collaboration workflows, respectively.
To achieve coverage, we prompt the LLM to generate
distinct requests and then deduplicate the generated requests
based on the methods involved in each request. For the
single-method scenario, we prompt the LLM to iterate over
each method and generate one request per method, aiming
for 100% coverage. In the multi-method scenario, the gener-
ator simulates 200 requests for single-application workflows
and 100 for multi-application suites. Tab. 1 summarizes
the statistics for each application and the corresponding
generated requests. The generated requests achieve high
coverage across all scenarios except for Suite 2, which we
attribute to the complexity of the applications it contains.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
TABLE 1. STATISTICS FOR OUR SYNTHETIC DATASET. FOR EACH APPLICATION,WE REPORT THE NUMBER OF COLLECTED METHODS AND SCOPES,
THE HEIGHT OF THE RECONSTRUCTED PERMISSION HIERARCHY,AND THE NUMBER OF GENERATED REQUESTS TOGETHER WITH THEIR COVERAGE
ON SCOPES(C Scope )AND METHODS(C Method )FOR BOTH SINGLE METHOD AND MULTI METHOD SCENARIOS.
Applications # Methods # Scopes Tree Height Single-method Multi-method
Max Avg. # RequestsC scope Cmethod # RequestsC scope Cmethod
Gmail 79 10 5 2.3 79 100% 100% 151 100% 100%
Google Calendar 37 17 5 5.0 37 62.5% 100% 117 68.8% 100%
Google Drive 58 10 4 2.5 55 100% 100% 168 100% 98.2%
Google Storage 81 5 2 2.0 81 100% 100% 114 100% 100%
Slack 247 84 3 1.0 266 100% 100% 190 100% 91.4%
DropBox 120 13 1 1.0 120 100% 100% 194 100% 100%
Outlook 44 8 2 1.1 44 100% 84.1% 154 79.5% 100%
Outlook Calendar 51 7 3 1.4 51 100% 82.4% 113 85.7% 82.4%
Notion 32 7 2 1.2 32 100% 100% 127 100% 100%
Zoom 184 47 2 1.2 184 100% 100% 161 95.7% 97.8%
Suite 1 171 36 - - - - - 77 94.7% 83.3%
Suite 2 465 111 - - - - - 93 33.3% 15.1%
5.1. Reconstructed Permission Hierarchies
In the reconstructed permission hierarchies, we find that
applications exhibit very different structural patterns. We
present these differences for each application by reporting
the maximum and average heights of the reconstructed
hierarchies in Tab. 1. Some applications, such as Gmail,
Google Drive, and Google Calendar, form deep hierarchical
graphs that condense into proper trees once cycles are
removed. For example, Google Calendar forms a single tree
of height 5. In contrast, applications such as Slack, Zoom,
and Dropbox have relatively flat hierarchies composed of
many disconnected components. Each component is either
a small tree or a single scope, forming a shallow forest
with maximum height 1 and average heights near 1.0. These
contrasting structures reflect different design philosophies.
Some services favor simplicity and define a small number of
broad permission groups, including highly privileged scopes,
which naturally appear as roots in the reconstructed hier-
archy. Others pursue fine-grained access control, avoiding
broad scopes and instead exposing many low-privilege gran-
ular scopes, which leads to flat and fragmented hierarchies.
6. Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate MiniScope against three
baselines that apply different levels of security mechanisms:
an agent without any enforcement (Vanilla), an agent
that enforces permissions at the granularity of individual
methods (PerMethod), and an agent assisted by a separate
LLM that infers the least-privilege permission (LLMScope).
We aim to answer the following questions about MiniScope,
in relation to those baselines:
1) How minimal are the selected permissions?
2) What runtime overhead does it introduce?
3) How frequently does it require user confirmation?
6.1. Implementation and Baselines
We implement MiniScope and the baselines in roughly
8,000 lines of Python. We build an end-to-end tool-calling
agent on LangGraph [35] with command-line interaction
and connect it to external services via the Model Context
Protocol (MCP) [7]. The core logic of the agent is split
into two nodes in the graph: the planner and the executor.
The planner receives the user’s prompt along with tool
metadata (function names, descriptions, and arguments)
and invokes the LLM to generate an execution plan. The
executor then issues tool calls according to the plan. Tool
calls whose arguments are fully specified are executed
immediately, whereas calls that depend on earlier results
are deferred until all required arguments become available.
Between calls, the executor may ask the LLM to transform
earlier outputs into the format required by later tools.
For example, given the requestCan you list all
the channels I have on Slack and read
the latest message from each of them?,
the executor must convert the channel-listing result into
arguments for per-channel message-reading calls.
Based on this agent, MiniScope’s Least Privilege Solver
is integrated as a LangGraph node positioned between the
planner and executor. Because MCP function names do not
always match the method names used in official documen-
tation, we maintain a mapping from each MCP function
to its corresponding API methods. This mapping also al-
lows custom MCP functions that internally invoke multiple
methods. The session token identifying the agent’s session
is included in the MCP request header to the MCP server.
We wrap each MCP function with a decorator that validates
whether the tool call is permitted under the currently granted
permissions. If a call is not permitted, the decorator returns
an insufficient-permission error as the tool’s response.
We conduct all experiments on Google Cloud Platform
using an n2-standard-8 instance (8 vCPUs, 32 GB RAM).
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Dropbox Google
Calendar
Google
Drive
Gmail Google
Storage
Notion Outlook Outlook
Calendar
Slack Zoom
0
20
40
60
80
100Mismatch Rate %
 18.9
43.6 40.5
12.5
5.9 3.0 4.9
10.8
67.3 64.6
34.6
12.5
 11.8
6.4
14.8
24.3
47.3 44.3
6.2
12.5
5.9 5.6 7.7
29.2
51.4
81.8
70.9
55.6
21.9
52.3
43.1
52.3
43.7
61.7
48.6
76.4 79.7
70.4
53.1
65.9 68.6
81.6
61.7
Suite1
79.698.9
89.2
100.098.9
Dropbox Google
Calendar
Google
Drive
Gmail Google
Storage
Notion Outlook Outlook
Calendar
Slack Zoom
0
20
40
60
80
100Mismatch Rate %
1.0
51.3
38.1
31.1
3.1
35.1
13.3
7.9 3.72.6
34.2
75.6
48.3
35.1
6.3
46.1
32.7
12.1
25.5
1.5
43.6
72.0
59.6
13.2
6.3
61.7
31.0
12.6
19.9
58.8
65.0
86.3
88.1
62.3
40.9
79.9
70.8
79.5 77.081.4 82.9
77.4
84.8 86.0 83.5
89.6 71.7
96.3 83.9
Suite2
33.8
59.7
71.4
100.0100.0
GPT 5 Claude Sonnet 4.5 Gemini 2.5 Flash Qwen3-30B Llama-3.1-70B Overprivileged Infeasible
Figure 6. Percentage of permission mismatches for LLMScope relative to MiniScope. Top left: single-application, single-method. Bottom left: single-
application, multi-method. Right: multi-application, multi-method. Green checkmarks indicate zero mismatches.
6.2. Comparison against LLM-inferred Permission
In Fig. 6, we compare MiniScope against LLMScope in
terms of the permissions required for each task. For each
synthetic request, the LLM is given the mapping between
methods and permission scopes, along with the execution
plan, and is asked to determine the required scopes under
the least-privilege principle. We leverage Pydantic AI [1] to
ensure the validity of the output permissions for LLMScope.
For each application, we report the mismatch rate relative
to the solution from MiniScope’s Least Privilege Solver.
Specifically, we classify mismatches into two categories:in-
feasiblesolutions provide valid but insufficient permissions
to execute the methods in the plan, whileoverprivileged
solutions provide valid and sufficient permissions but incur
higher cost than MiniScope ’s solution. To account for
variation in model capabilities, we evaluate three state-of-
the-art proprietary LLMs: GPT 5, Claude Sonnet 4.5, and
Gemini 2.5 Flash as well as two popular open-source mod-
els: Qwen3-30B and Llama-3.1-70B.
Overall, we find that the latest proprietary LLMs achieve
consistently lower mismatch rates across all benchmarks
compared to open-source models, which is reasonable given
their differences in scale. The infeasibility rate for pro-
prietary LLMs is also very low (except for Outlook and
Outlook Calendar in the single-application, multi-method
setting). This means that, when used to infer required
permissions, these models generally prompt the user with
permission sets that are sufficient to complete the task.
However, their overprivilege rates remain high, and we
observe three main trends in Fig. 6.
First, the quality of LLM-generated solutions correlates
with the complexity of the underlying permission hierar-
chies. Across both single-method and multi-method bench-
marks, mismatch rates are much lower for applications with
flat hierarchies than for those with deep, tree-like hierar-
chies. For applications such as Google Calendar, Google
Drive, and Gmail, the permission hierarchies are deep and
tree-structured, and even in the single-application, single-
method setting, the mismatch rate can exceed 40%. In
contrast, for applications with flat hierarchies, where each
method maps to exactly one permission group, identifying
the minimal set of permissions is straightforward, and the
mismatch rate is very low (even zero), as seen in Dropbox,
Outlook and Zoom.
Second, the difficulty of finding least-privilege permis-
sions grows with the complexity of the execution plan. In
the single-application setting, we observe a clear increase
in mismatch rates when multiple methods are involved, and
the number of infeasible solutions rises substantially in the
multi-method benchmark (especially for open-source mod-
els). This indicates that as user tasks become more complex,
LLMs become less likely to find optimal solutions and may
even fail to provide sufficient permissions. The increase
in infeasibility rate for Outlook and Outlook Calendar is
particularly significant, which we attribute to ambiguous
naming conventions. For instance,Mail.Readappears to
be a child node ofMail.ReadWrite, but in fact it is not.
Third, when execution plans involve tool calls from
multiple applications, the mismatch rate increases signif-
icantly. We attribute this to the larger context required:
the prompt must include the descriptions of tool calls and
permissions for all involved applications. In our setup, the
context size roughly triples because each suite contains three
applications, making it harder for the LLM to infer the op-
timal solution. A similar pattern appears even within single-
application tasks when comparing Slack and Dropbox. Even
though both of them have relatively flat scope hierarchies,
the mismatch rate for Slack is higher because Slack has
more methods and permission groups in its OAuth config-
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
TABLE 2. OVERPRIVILEGERATIO FORLLMSCOPE
Multi-app Single-app Single-app
Multi-method Multi-method Single-method
Claude Sonnet 4.5 1.47 1.13 1.19
Gemini 2.5 Flash 1.49 1.10 1.07
GPT 5 1.12 1.03 1.04
LLaMA3.1 1.94 1.44 1.59
Qwen 3 2.19 1.28 1.37
uration. This trend aligns with the observation that longer
LLM prompts tend to degrade downstream task performance
[38]. Longer prompts also introduce higher runtime and
operational costs, which we discuss in the later section.
In summary, while LLMs can often infer sufficient per-
mission and occasionally optimal ones, the quality of their
output is highly sensitive to the complexity of the permission
hierarchy, the complexity of the request, and the length of
the context. The high rate of overprivileged results from
LLMs also exposes a larger attack surface and increases
risks for users, as we show next in detail.
6.2.1. Overprivilege deployment.In Tab. 2, we report the
average overprivilege ratio across models for each scenario.
We define the overprivilege ratio as the number of meth-
ods allowed under the permission inferred by LLMScope
divided by the number of methods allowed under the per-
mission selected by MiniScope. From the table, we observe
overprivilege ratios ranging from 1.04 to 2.19. Given that
the average number of allowed methods by MiniScope in
our dataset is around 30, this implies that the permissions
inferred by LLMScope typically grant additional tool calls
beyond what is minimally required.
We then extend our overprivilege analysis to real world
agents: connectors supported by ChatGPT and Claude. No-
tably, we findsix overprivileged configurationsamong the
connectors we explored. For each connector, we collect the
permissions requested during initialization as well as the
set of supported tool actions. We then apply MiniScope’s
Least Privilege Solver to determine the minimal permissions
required for those tool calls. In Tab. 3, we present the num-
ber of methods permitted under each connector’s requested
permissions and under the least privilege permissions in-
ferred by MiniScope. For Google Workspace, ChatGPT’s
connectors request permissions that allow modification and
deletion of emails and calendar events, even though the
agent interface advertises read only capabilities. Claude’s
connectors do not request extra scopes for Gmail or Calen-
dar, but its Google Drive integration includes an optional
scope that enables file modification and deletion beyond
its stated read only behavior. A similar pattern appears for
Dropbox: while ChatGPT discloses only read only actions
on a user’s storage, its requested permissions include access
to sharing metadata and collaborator information, capabili-
ties that may introduce unnecessary privacy risks.
TABLE 3. OVERPRIVILEGE INCHATGPTANDCLAUDE CONNECTORS.
RED INDICATES OVERPRIVILEGED DEPLOYMENT.
ChatGPT Claude
Requested MiniScope Requested MiniScope
Gmail 50 32 32 32
Google Calendar 12 5 15 15
Google Storage 27 27 45 27
Notion 32 13 32 29
DropBox 44 25 - -
6.3. Latency and Operational Cost
We now compare the cost introduced by MiniScope
in terms of latency and operational overhead, relative to
LLMScope and the Vanilla Agent. For LLMScope, we use
GPT 5 as the underlying LLM, as it achieved the lowest
mismatch rate in the previous section. In Fig. 7, we report
latency across different scenarios, broken down into four
components: planning, permission solving, execution, and
response. In these measurements, we omit the time required
for user confirmation, as this varies across users. Instead,
we compare the user burden in §6.4.
By design, MiniScope introduces additional overhead for
permission solving and checking during execution compared
to Vanilla Agent. As shown in Fig. 7, however, the Least
Privilege Solver and Permission Checker in MiniScope incur
only 1–6% runtime overhead. Although MiniScope uses
ILP to compute the minimal set of required scopes, each
ILP instance contains only a small number of variables,
resulting in fast solving times. In contrast, LLMScope incurs
significant overhead because permission inference requires
prompting the LLM. While the quality of LLM-inferred
permissions could improve with better prompts or test-time
scaling, this baseline suffers from high latency and poor
scalability for complex tasks. The primary reason is that
each LLM prompt must include not only the execution plan
but also the entire specification of the services. Because
this specification is often large, and in scenarios involving
several applications must include all of them, permission
inference can become slower than executing the task itself.
Such overhead significantly undermines the user experience.
In terms of operational cost, in the multi-application,
multi-method setting, each task requires additional 50k
tokens, which amounts to about $0.063 per request. By
contrast, MiniScope can run directly on a normal user device
without introducing any extra operational cost.
6.4. User Effort
Like many prior works [29], [30], [48], [66], MiniScope
brings humans into the loop during an agentic workflow.
We now simulate how frequently users need to provide con-
firmation when using MiniScope, especially in comparison
with the PerMethod baseline.
To do so, we first approximate three months of typical
user interactions with an application by prompting the LLM.
Unlike the synthetic requests in the prior section, which fo-
cused on coverage and diversity, our goal here is to generate
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Single App
Single Method
Single App
Multi Method
Multi App
Multi Method
0
4
8
12
16
20Latency (s)
2.92 3.04
6.49
4.42 4.54
10.20
4.91 5.23
20.50
Response
Execution
Permission Solving
Planning
Vanilla Agent MiniScope LLMScope
Figure 7. Latency breakdown of MiniScope compared to two baselines.
a request distribution that reflects typical real world usage.
The prompt instructs the LLM to identify the most common
methods and use them frequently, while distributing less
common methods sparsely across the month.
Next, we model potential user behaviors. To capture
different attitudes toward security and convenience, we sim-
ulate four types of users: one who always selects “Always
allow”, representing minimal security awareness; one who
always selects “Allow once”, representing maximal cau-
tion; one who selects “Always allow” only for per-
missions that hasreadonlyproperty, modeling a simple
sensitivity based strategy; and, inspired by [48], a user
simulated by an LLM that is guided by security aware
prompts. Together, these four cases reflect a spectrum of
realistic user strategies, from permissive to highly cautious,
and also include both static and an adaptive model simulated
strategy.
Fig. 8 presents the results of our simulation experi-
ments on Gmail. The user who always selects “Allow
Once”represents the upper bound of user effort. The user
who always selects “Always Allow” needs to confirm
only the first few requests until all permissions are granted,
after which no further confirmations are required. At a high
level, compared to method-level enforcement, MiniScope
reduces the number of confirmations because it groups tool
calls into permission groups, and once the user grants a
permission, the agent can use all tool calls that belong to
that group. Under method-level enforcement, on the other
hand, the user must make a decision for every tool call,
which increases decision overhead and leads to repetitive
confirmations for calls with similar sensitivity. These effects
are reflected in the results shown in Fig. 8. Compared to
method-level enforcement, the LLM simulated user requires
four times fewer confirmations in MiniScope, and the read
only user also requires fewer confirmations. Prior work
reports confirmation rates of 30–60% for sensitive tasks such
as clinical use [66] and 10–20% for GUI or web agents [29],
[30], [48]. Our findings align with these results, and we
believe MiniScope’s overhead on user confirmation can be
further reduced (see §7.3).
0 100 200 300 400 500
# Requests
0
100
200
300
400
500# Confirmations
Gmail User Simulation
MiniScope Always Once
MiniScope Always Allow
MiniScope Simulated
MiniScope R.O.
PerMethod Simulated
PerMethod R.O.
Figure 8. Simulation of user confirmation overhead: cumulative confirma-
tions required to execute a three month request sequence on Gmail, where
“Simulate” denotes the LLM simulated user and “R.O.” denotes a user who
grants “Always allow” only for read operations.
7. Discussion
7.1. Beyond Tool Calling Agents
In this paper, MiniScope focuses on tool calling agents,
where users connect multiple services to an agent and
perform tasks across these services through the agent. As
LLMs become increasingly powerful, there are different
possible deployments of AI agents, including Computer
Use Agents [52], Web Agents [54], [73], and communi-
cation patterns that are not limited to agent-to-service but
also include agent-to-agent [27], [68], [69]. Recent work
has demonstrated attacks against these deployments [31],
[33], [42], [71], [85], and it remains unclear what the best
scoping mechanism should be. The community has actively
discussed these challenges [64], [67]. We believe MiniScope
can be extended to these scenarios. At the core of MiniScope
is the idea of representing permissions in a hierarchical
structure that enables mechanical enforcement of least priv-
ilege access. Thus, if suitable permission hierarchies can
be defined for these deployments, MiniScope can be reused
to automatically infer least privilege permissions. Extending
MiniScope in this way would provide a unified mechanism
for expressing and enforcing permissions across diverse
agent deployments, reducing the ad-hoc security decisions
that currently arise in these environments. This would enable
consistent least privilege enforcement across agent to service
and agent to agent workflows.
7.2. Fine-grained Access Control
One direction toward better security is exploring fine-
grained access control mechanisms. Cloud infrastructure
already demonstrates the value of granular permissions
through IAM (Identity and Access Management) systems
[65], where each action on each resource can be precisely
controlled. While translating these patterns to user-facing
agentic systems remains challenging, MiniScope’s design
provides natural extension points for such granularity.
Our hierarchy reconstruction reveals not only how per-
mission groups relate to one another but also how individual
API methods are organized. This insight allows us to refine
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
enforcement from permission-level down to method-level.
Our framework can be further enhanced by combining it
with execution plan analysis [63]. By examining the argu-
ments passed to each tool call, we can determine not just
which methods are needed, but which specific resources
will be accessed. This enables a two-dimensional access
control model where permissions are constrained by both
action and target. For example, when an agent needs to
send a Slack message, the standard permission typically
allows messaging any user in the workspace. By analyzing
the execution plan’s recipient parameter, our framework
could limit permissions to only that specific channel or
user. Such fine-grained controls provide optimal security,
especially in cloud environments where least privilege is
critical. Yet in personal agentic contexts, implementing such
granularity introduces usability challenges. Asking users to
approve detailed permissions for each resource interaction
could overwhelm them, potentially leading to permission fa-
tigue where users automatically approve everything without
reading. Therefore, we intentionally design our system at a
relatively coarse granularity, with finer granularity available
as an optional extension. Similar to efforts that pursue
stateful and fine-grained authorization in cloud settings [15],
future work may explore adaptive mechanisms that adjust
permission granularity based on resource sensitivity, user
expertise, and operational risk.
7.3. Limitations
MiniScope prompts the user when the agent needs addi-
tional permissions to complete a task, a paradigm widely
used in mobile applications. In practice, however, users
may still make mistakes, either by approving overly broad
requests or by overlooking subtle risks. While involving
users in the loop can introduce some overhead, we view
this as a necessary trade-off between usability and security.
To reduce user burden, a potential direction is to combine
MiniScope with model-based techniques [77] that predict
user preferences and reduce confirmation frequency, though
such approaches must contend with the current unreliability
of predictive models. Another direction is to refine the
permission hierarchy, as our analysis in §6.4 shows that the
frequency of confirmations is closely tied to its structure.
Overall, these challenges present promising opportunities for
future work on reducing user burden without compromising
security in agentic settings.
8. Related Works
In this section, we discuss related works on attacks
targeting tool-calling agents and existing defensive strategies
at both the model-level and the system-level.
Attacks against agentic systems.For stand-alone LLMs,
jailbreaking attacks bypass alignment to elicit disallowed
outputs [4], [88], while prompt injection attacks override
instructions and redirect model behavior [26], [41], [70]. The
transition from stand-alone LLMs to fully agentic systems
has further expanded the attack surface. In the retrieval
pipeline, PoisonedRAG shows that inserting a few optimized
documents into a corpus can reliably steer outputs [89]. For
tool-calling agents, indirect prompt injections [26] can be
embedded in untrusted retrieved data, hijacking execution.
At the decision layer, ToolHijacker [62] manipulates tool
descriptions to divert calls to attacker-controlled APIs, and
Imprompter [23] generates obfuscated prompts that trigger
improper tool use and data exfiltration. Together, these at-
tacks reveal that vulnerabilities now span the full lifecycle
of agentic systems.
Defenses for agentic systems.In response, a line of work
has explored model-level defenses, aiming to harden LLMs
against jailbreaks and injected instructions. At training time,
techniques include alignment training (e.g., RLHF, RLAIF,
Constitutional AI) [12], [37], [55] and robustness-oriented
fine-tuning methods on jailbreak and injection examples
[16], [17], [56]. At decoding time, safety-aware generation
methods alter token probabilities to suppress unsafe contin-
uations, and steering techniques use activation-level signals
to maintain refusals under attack [10], [82].
To achieve more rigorous guarantees, several attempts
have been made towards system-level defenses.
Several works adopt policy-based enforcement [18],
[22], [46], [63], [67], [69], [72], [75], enabling users to
define explicit policies through domain specific languages
[19] for deterministic control of agent behavior. While this
approach is effective and flexible, it often requires substan-
tial manual effort and specialized expertise to create accurate
policies across diverse agentic use cases. Some works [63],
[72] attempt to reduce this burden by leveraging LLMs
to automatically generate policies; however, this introduces
potential unreliability due to inherent LLM limitations.
Another line of work explores architecture-level designs
to limit potential harm.f-secure [80] disaggregates the
agent into planner and executor, leveraging information flow
control to ensure the planner only accesses trusted data.
IsolateGPT [81] isolates mutually distrusting applications in
separate environments while relying on a centralized trusted
hub to handle planning and inter-application communica-
tion. ACE [39] identifies the risk of trusting application
descriptions and proposes two-step planning: first planning
with abstract applications, then performing concrete plan-
ning with real applications to mitigate this risk. AirGapA-
gent [11] targets contextual integrity by leveraging the LLM
as a context minimizer, revealing only necessary personal
data to the agent. CaMeL [20] andPFI[32] employ two con-
ceptually separate LLMs—one extracts control flow from
trusted user queries while another parses untrusted, unstruc-
tured data into structured formats—ensuring that untrusted
data retrieved by the LLM cannot impact program flow.
These approaches follow the Dual LLM pattern [13], [78],
where a separate LLM processes only trusted information
and performs enforcement over primary LLM. However, the
fundamental limitation of this pattern is that the separate
LLM may still hallucinate and therefore cannot provide the
same rigorous security guarantees as MiniScope.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
9. Conclusion
MiniScope is a framework that enables tool-calling
agents to operate on user accounts while confining potential
damage from unreliable LLMs. MiniScope provides rigor-
ous least-privilege guarantees by constructing permission
hierarchies from existing authorization workflows and lever-
aging a novel ILP formulation to automatically compute
the minimal set of permissions required for diverse agentic
tasks. Our findings show that systematic, mechanical en-
forcement of least privilege is both feasible and effective for
agentic workflows. Looking forward, we believe that well-
defined permission hierarchies can serve as a foundation for
extending MiniScope to diverse agent deployments.
Acknowledgments
We thank Julien Piet and Xiaoyuan Liu for discussions
on the overall system design, and David Wagner for discus-
sions on the permission model and user study. We also thank
students in the Sky Security Group for their helpful feedback
that improved the presentation of this work. This work is
supported by gifts from Accenture, AMD, Anyscale, Cisco,
Google, IBM, Intel, Intesa Sanpaolo, Lambda, Mibura, Mi-
crosoft, NVIDIA, Samsung SDS, SAP, and VMware.
References
[1] Pydantic AI. https://ai.pydantic.dev/.
[2] General Analysis. Supabase mcp can leak your entire sql database.
https://www.generalanalysis.com/blog/supabase-mcp-blog.
[3] Android. Permissions on android. https://developer.android.com/gu
ide/topics/permissions/overview.
[4] Cem Anil, Esin Durmus, Nina Panickssery, Mrinank Sharma, Joe
Benton, Sandipan Kundu, Joshua Batson, Meg Tong, Jesse Mu,
Daniel Ford, et al. Many-shot jailbreaking.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 37:129696–129742, 2024.
[5] Anthropic. Claude. https://claude.ai/.
[6] Anthropic. Discover tools that work with claude. https://www.anth
ropic.com/news/connectors-directory.
[7] Anthropic. Model context protocol. https://modelcontextprotocol.io/
introduction.
[8] Apple. Introducing apple intelligence, the personal intelligence sys-
tem that puts powerful generative models at the core of iphone, ipad,
and mac. https://www.apple.com/newsroom/2024/06/introducing-app
le-intelligence-for-iphone-ipad-and-mac/.
[9] Apple. Requesting access to protected resources. https://developer.
apple.com/documentation/uikit/requesting-access-to-protected-resou
rces.
[10] Andy Arditi, Oscar Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Pan-
ickssery, Wes Gurnee, and Neel Nanda. Refusal in language mod-
els is mediated by a single direction, 2024.URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2406.11717, 2022.
[11] Eugene Bagdasarian, Ren Yi, Sahra Ghalebikesabi, Peter Kairouz,
Marco Gruteser, Sewoong Oh, Borja Balle, and Daniel Ramage.
Airgapagent: Protecting privacy-conscious conversational agents. In
Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 3868–3882, 2024.
[12] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell,
Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia
Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmless-
ness from ai feedback.arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
[13] Luca Beurer-Kellner, Beat Buesser, Ana-Maria Cret ¸u, Edoardo
Debenedetti, Daniel Dobos, Daniel Fabian, Marc Fischer, David
Froelicher, Kathrin Grosse, Daniel Naeff, et al. Design patterns
for securing llm agents against prompt injections.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.08837, 2025.
[14] Amel Bourdoucen and Janne Lindqvist. Privacy of default apps
in apple’s mobile ecosystem. InProceedings of the 2024 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–32,
2024.
[15] Leo Cao, Luoxi Meng, Deian Stefan, and Earlence Fernandes. State-
ful least privilege authorization for the cloud. In33rd USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24), pages 3477–3494, 2024.
[16] Sizhe Chen, Julien Piet, Chawin Sitawarin, and David Wagner. Struq:
Defending against prompt injection with structured queries.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.06363, 2024.
[17] Sizhe Chen, Arman Zharmagambetov, Saeed Mahloujifar, Kamalika
Chaudhuri, David Wagner, and Chuan Guo. Secalign: Defending
against prompt injection with preference optimization.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.05451, 2024.
[18] Zhaorun Chen, Mintong Kang, and Bo Li. Shieldagent: Shield-
ing agents via verifiable safety policy reasoning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.22738, 2025.
[19] Joseph W Cutler, Craig Disselkoen, Aaron Eline, Shaobo He, Kyle
Headley, Michael Hicks, Kesha Hietala, Eleftherios Ioannidis, John
Kastner, Anwar Mamat, et al. Cedar: A new language for expressive,
fast, safe, and analyzable authorization.Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages, 8(OOPSLA1):670–697, 2024.
[20] Edoardo Debenedetti, Ilia Shumailov, Tianqi Fan, Jamie Hayes,
Nicholas Carlini, Daniel Fabian, Christoph Kern, Chongyang Shi,
Andreas Terzis, and Florian Tram `er. Defeating prompt injections by
design.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18813, 2025.
[21] Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunovi ´c, Luca Beurer-
Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Florian Tram `er. Agentdojo: A dynamic
environment to evaluate attacks and defenses for llm agents.arXiv
e-prints, pages arXiv–2406, 2024.
[22] Abrom Douglas. Empower ai agents with user context using amazon
cognito. https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/security/empower-ai-agent
s-with-user-context-using-amazon-cognito/.
[23] Xiaohan Fu, Shuheng Li, Zihan Wang, Yihao Liu, Rajesh K
Gupta, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Earlence Fernandes. Im-
prompter: Tricking llm agents into improper tool use.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.14923, 2024.
[24] Google. Connect google workspace apps & services to gemini apps.
https://support.google.com/gemini/answer/15229592.
[25] Google. Gemini. https://gemini.google.com/.
[26] Kai Greshake, Sahar Abdelnabi, Shailesh Mishra, Christoph Endres,
Thorsten Holz, and Mario Fritz. Not what you’ve signed up for:
Compromising real-world llm-integrated applications with indirect
prompt injection. InProceedings of the 16th ACM workshop on
artificial intelligence and security, pages 79–90, 2023.
[27] Shanshan Han, Qifan Zhang, Yuhang Yao, Weizhao Jin, and
Zhaozhuo Xu. Llm multi-agent systems: Challenges and open prob-
lems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03578, 2024.
[28] Dick Hardt. The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework. https://www.
rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749, October 2012.
[29] Gaole He, Gianluca Demartini, and Ujwal Gadiraju. Plan-then-
execute: An empirical study of user trust and team performance when
using llm agents as a daily assistant. InProceedings of the 2025 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–22,
2025.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
[30] Faria Huq, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Frank F Xu, Tianyue Ou, Shuyan
Zhou, Jeffrey P Bigham, and Graham Neubig. Cowpilot: A frame-
work for autonomous and human-agent collaborative web navigation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16609, 2025.
[31] Rishi Jha, Harold Triedman, Justin Wagle, and Vitaly Shmatikov.
Breaking and fixing defenses against control-flow hijacking in multi-
agent systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17276, 2025.
[32] Juhee Kim, Woohyuk Choi, and Byoungyoung Lee. Prompt flow
integrity to prevent privilege escalation in llm agents.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.15547, 2025.
[33] Thomas Kuntz, Agatha Duzan, Hao Zhao, Francesco Croce, Zico
Kolter, Nicolas Flammarion, and Maksym Andriushchenko. Os-harm:
A benchmark for measuring safety of computer use agents.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.14866, 2025.
[34] LangChain. Langchain benchmarks. https://langchain-ai.github.io/la
ngchain-benchmarks/index.html#.
[35] LangGraph. Langgraph. https://www.langchain.com/langgraph.
[36] Felix Lau, Stuart H Rubin, Michael H Smith, and Ljiljana Trajkovic.
Distributed denial of service attacks. InSmc 2000 conference pro-
ceedings. 2000 ieee international conference on systems, man and
cybernetics. ’cybernetics evolving to systems, humans, organizations,
and their complex interactions’(cat. no. 0, volume 3, pages 2275–
2280. IEEE, 2000.
[37] Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Thomas Mesnard,
Johan Ferret, Kellie Lu, Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Car-
bune, Abhinav Rastogi, et al. Rlaif vs. rlhf: Scaling reinforcement
learning from human feedback with ai feedback.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
[38] Mosh Levy, Alon Jacoby, and Yoav Goldberg. Same task, more
tokens: the impact of input length on the reasoning performance of
large language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek
Srikumar, editors,Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 15339–15353, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[39] Evan Li, Tushin Mallick, Evan Rose, William Robertson, Alina
Oprea, and Cristina Nita-Rotaru. Ace: A security architecture for
llm-integrated app systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20984, 2025.
[40] Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Yuekang Li, Kailong Wang, Zihao Wang, Xi-
aofeng Wang, Tianwei Zhang, Yepang Liu, Haoyu Wang, Yan Zheng,
et al. Prompt injection attack against llm-integrated applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05499, 2023.
[41] Yupei Liu, Yuqi Jia, Runpeng Geng, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang
Gong. Formalizing and benchmarking prompt injection attacks and
defenses. In33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
24), pages 1831–1847, 2024.
[42] Weidi Luo, Qiming Zhang, Tianyu Lu, Xiaogeng Liu, Bin Hu, Hung-
Chun Chiu, Siyuan Ma, Yizhe Zhang, Xusheng Xiao, Yinzhi Cao,
et al. Code agent can be an end-to-end system hacker: Bench-
marking real-world threats of computer-use agent.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.06607, 2025.
[43] Nathan Malkin, David Wagner, and Serge Egelman. Runtime per-
missions for privacy in proactive intelligent assistants. InEighteenth
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2022), pages
633–651, 2022.
[44] Molly McHugh-Johnson. 14 new things you can do with pixel thanks
to ai. https://blog.google/products/pixel/google-pixel-9-new-ai-featu
res/.
[45] Microsoft. Plug, play, and prey: The security risks of the model
context protocol. https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/microso
ftdefendercloudblog/plug-play-and-prey-the-security-risks-of-the-m
odel-context-protocol/4410829.
[46] Microsoft. Wassette: A security-oriented runtime that runs webassem-
bly components via mcp. https://microsoft.github.io/wassette/latest/.
[47] Hussein Mozannar, Gagan Bansal, Cheng Tan, Adam Fourney, Victor
Dibia, Jingya Chen, Jack Gerrits, Tyler Payne, Matheus Kunzler Mal-
daner, Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin, et al. Magentic-ui: Towards
human-in-the-loop agentic systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22358,
2025.
[48] Hussein Mozannar, Gagan Bansal, Cheng Tan, Adam Fourney, Victor
Dibia, Jingya Chen, Jack Gerrits, Tyler Payne, Matheus Kunzler
Maldaner, Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin, Erkang (Eric) Zhu, Grif-
fin Bassman, Jacob Alber, Peter Chang, Ricky Loynd, Friederike
Niedtner, Ece Kamar, Maya Murad, Rafah Hosn, and Saleema
Amershi. Magentic-ui, an experimental human-centered web agent.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/magentic-ui-an-exp
erimental-human-centered-web-agenta.
[49] Milad Nasr, Nicholas Carlini, Chawin Sitawarin, Sander V Schul-
hoff, Jamie Hayes, Michael Ilie, Juliette Pluto, Shuang Song, Harsh
Chaudhari, Ilia Shumailov, et al. The attacker moves second: Stronger
adaptive attacks bypass defenses against llm jailbreaks and prompt
injections.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09023, 2025.
[50] OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://chat.openai.com/.
[51] OpenAI. Codex security guide. https://developers.openai.com/code
x/security/.
[52] OpenAI. Computer use agent. https://platform.openai.com/docs/gui
des/tools-computer-use.
[53] OpenAI. Connectors and actions terms. https://openai.com/policies/
connectors-actions-terms/.
[54] OpenAI. Introducing operator. https://openai.com/index/introducing
-operator/.
[55] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wain-
wright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina
Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow in-
structions with human feedback.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[56] Julien Piet, Maha Alrashed, Chawin Sitawarin, Sizhe Chen, Zeming
Wei, Elizabeth Sun, Basel Alomair, and David Wagner. Jatmo: Prompt
injection defense by task-specific finetuning. InEuropean Symposium
on Research in Computer Security, pages 105–124. Springer, 2024.
[57] Vipula Rawte, Amit Sheth, and Amitava Das. A survey of halluci-
nation in large foundation models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05922,
2023.
[58] Jerome H Saltzer and Michael D Schroeder. The protection of infor-
mation in computer systems.Proceedings of the IEEE, 63(9):1278–
1308, 1975.
[59] Ravi S Sandhu. Role-based access control. InAdvances in computers,
volume 46, pages 237–286. Elsevier, 1998.
[60] Yonadav Shavit, Sandhini Agarwal, Miles Brundage, Steven Adler,
Cullen O’Keefe, Rosie Campbell, Teddy Lee, Pamela Mishkin, Tyna
Eloundou, Alan Hickey, et al. Practices for governing agentic ai
systems.Research Paper, OpenAI, 2023.
[61] Bingyu Shen, Lili Wei, Chengcheng Xiang, Yudong Wu, Mingyao
Shen, Yuanyuan Zhou, and Xinxin Jin. Can systems explain permis-
sions better? understanding users’ misperceptions under smartphone
runtime permission model. In30th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 21), pages 751–768, 2021.
[62] Jiawen Shi, Zenghui Yuan, Guiyao Tie, Pan Zhou, Neil Zhenqiang
Gong, and Lichao Sun. Prompt injection attack to tool selection in
llm agents.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19793, 2025.
[63] Tianneng Shi, Jingxuan He, Zhun Wang, Linyu Wu, Hongwei Li,
Wenbo Guo, and Dawn Song. Progent: Programmable privilege
control for llm agents.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11703, 2025.
[64] Alex Simons. The future of ai agents—and why oauth must evolve.
https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/microsoft-entra-blog/the-f
uture-of-ai-agents%E2%80%94and-why-oauth-must-evolve/382739
1.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
[65] Chetanpal Singh, Rahul Thakkar, and Jatinder Warraich. Iam iden-
tity access management—importance in maintaining security systems
within organizations.European Journal of Engineering and Technol-
ogy Research, 8(4):30–38, 2023.
[66] Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei,
Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-
Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode clinical
knowledge.Nature, 620(7972):172–180, 2023.
[67] Tobin South, Samuele Marro, Thomas Hardjono, Robert Mahari,
Cedric Deslandes Whitney, Dazza Greenwood, Alan Chan, and Alex
Pentland. Authenticated delegation and authorized ai agents.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.09674, 2025.
[68] Rao Surapaneni, Miku Jha, Michael Vakoc, and Todd Segal. An-
nouncing the agent2agent protocol (a2a). https://developers.googleb
log.com/en/a2a-a-new-era-of-agent-interoperability/.
[69] Georgios Syros, Anshuman Suri, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Alina
Oprea. Saga: A security architecture for governing ai agentic systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21034, 2025.
[70] Sam Toyer, Olivia Watkins, Ethan Adrian Mendes, Justin Svegliato,
Luke Bailey, Tiffany Wang, Isaac Ong, Karim Elmaaroufi, Pieter
Abbeel, Trevor Darrell, et al. Tensor trust: Interpretable prompt injec-
tion attacks from an online game.arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01011,
2023.
[71] Harold Triedman, Rishi Jha, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Multi-
agent systems execute arbitrary malicious code.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.12188, 2025.
[72] Lillian Tsai and Eugene Bagdasarian. Contextual agent security: A
policy for every purpose. InProceedings of the 2025 Workshop on
Hot Topics in Operating Systems, pages 8–17, 2025.
[73] Browser Use. Enable ai to control your browser. https://github.com
/browser-use/browser-use.
[74] VentureBeat. How openai’s red team made chatgpt agent into an ai
fortress. https://venturebeat.com/security/openais-red-team-plan-mak
e-chatgpt-agent-an-ai-fortress.
[75] Haoyu Wang, Christopher M Poskitt, and Jun Sun. Agentspec:
Customizable runtime enforcement for safe and reliable llm agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18666, 2025.
[76] Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. Jailbroken:
How does llm safety training fail?Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:80079–80110, 2023.
[77] Primal Wijesekera, Arjun Baokar, Lynn Tsai, Joel Reardon, Serge
Egelman, David Wagner, and Konstantin Beznosov. The feasibility
of dynamically granted permissions: Aligning mobile privacy with
user preferences. In2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP), pages 1077–1093. IEEE, 2017.
[78] Simon Willison. The dual llm pattern for building ai assistants that
can resist prompt injection. https://simonwillison.net/2023/Apr/25/du
al-llm-pattern/.
[79] Simon Willison. The lethal trifecta for ai agents: private data,
untrusted content, and external communication. https://simonwilli
son.net/2025/Jun/16/the-lethal-trifecta/.
[80] Fangzhou Wu, Ethan Cecchetti, and Chaowei Xiao. System-level
defense against indirect prompt injection attacks: An information flow
control perspective.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19091, 2024.
[81] Yuhao Wu, Franziska Roesner, Tadayoshi Kohno, Ning Zhang, and
Umar Iqbal. Isolategpt: An execution isolation architecture for llm-
based agentic systems. InNDSS, 2025.
[82] Zhangchen Xu, Fengqing Jiang, Luyao Niu, Jinyuan Jia, Bill Yuchen
Lin, and Radha Poovendran. Safedecoding: Defending against
jailbreak attacks via safety-aware decoding.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.08983, 2024.
[83] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran,
Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reason-
ing and acting in language models. InThe eleventh international
conference on learning representations, 2022.
[84] Kaiyuan Zhang, Zian Su, Pin-Yu Chen, Elisa Bertino, Xiangyu Zhang,
and Ninghui Li. Llm agents should employ security principles.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.24019, 2025.
[85] Yanzhe Zhang, Tao Yu, and Diyi Yang. Attacking vision-
language computer agents via pop-ups, 2024c.URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2411.02391, 2024.
[86] Yue Zhang, Yafu Li, Leyang Cui, Deng Cai, Lemao Liu, Tingchen Fu,
Xinting Huang, Enbo Zhao, Yu Zhang, Yulong Chen, et al. Siren’s
song in the ai ocean: A survey on hallucination in large language
models.Computational Linguistics, pages 1–45, 2025.
[87] Yukun Zhao, Lingyong Yan, Weiwei Sun, Guoliang Xing, Shuaiqiang
Wang, Chong Meng, Zhicong Cheng, Zhaochun Ren, and Dawei Yin.
Improving the robustness of large language models via consistency
alignment.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14221, 2024.
[88] Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Nicholas Carlini, Milad Nasr, J Zico Kolter,
and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial attacks
on aligned language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043, 2023.
[89] Wei Zou, Runpeng Geng, Binghui Wang, and Jinyuan Jia.
{PoisonedRAG}: Knowledge corruption attacks to{Retrieval-
Augmented}generation of large language models. In34th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25), pages 3827–3844, 2025.
Appendix A.
Algorithm
Algorithm 1:BUILD-TREE(S, Methods)
Input:ScopesS; functionMethods(s)returning
allowed methods ofs
Output:Directed graphT= (V,E)
1foreachs∈Sdo
2M s ←Methods(s);
3Candidates←∅;
4foreacht∈S\ {s}do
5M t ←Methods(t);
6ifM s ⊂M t then
7Candidates←Candidates∪ {t};
8ifCandidates=∅then
9Parents[s]←∅;
10else
11Parents[s]←
arg mint∈Candidates |Methods(t)|;
12V←S;
13E←∅;
14foreachs∈Sdo
15foreachp∈Parents[s]do
16E←E∪ {(p,s)};
17return(V,E);
This algorithm (Alg. 1) constructs a permission hierar-
chy from a set of scopesSand a functionMethods(s),
which returns the set of API methods permitted by each
scopes. The goal is to produce a directed graphT=
(V,E)in which each edge(p,s)indicates thatpis a
strictly more permissive scope thans, and thatpis a
minimalsuch superset in terms of allowed methods. For
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
example, consider an example from the Google Calen-
dar API. Lets 1 =calendar.eventsands 2 =
calendar.events.owned. The scopes 1 permits a cer-
tain set of event-level operations, whiles 2 permits all op-
erations ofs 1 plus additional owner-level actions. In this
case,
Methods(s1)⊂Methods(s 2),
sos 2 is a candidate parent ofs 1. In the constructed graph,
this relationship appears as a directed edge
(s2,s 1)∈E,
representing thats 2 is strictly more permissive thans 1.
The algorithm determines the parent set for each scope
s∈Sby comparingMethods(s)withMethods(t)for
allt∈S\ {s}. Any scopetsatisfyingMethods(s)⊂
Methods(t)is collected into the set of candidate parents.
If this set is empty,shas no parent. Otherwise, the algorithm
selects the “closest” superscopes by choosing those candi-
dates whose method sets have minimum size. Formally,
Parents[s]←arg min
t∈Candidates
Methods(t)
 ,
ensuring that each parent differs fromsby the smallest
possible increase in permitted functionality.
Finally, the graphT= (V,E)is assembled by taking
V=Sand adding an edge(p,s)for everyp∈Parents[s].
The resulting structure organizes scopes (permissions) ac-
cording to their relative sensitivity, forming a clean hierarchy
suitable for downstream least-privilege analysis.
Appendix B.
Prompts
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Prompt
You are an AI assistant tasked with generating realistic user requests for an AI agent that interacts with various applications.
Your goal is to create one request for each API call provided in the API JSON file.
First, carefully review the following API JSON file containing the APIs provided by the application, along with short
descriptions for each API:
<api_json>{{API_JSON}}</api_json>
The application you will be working with is:
<application_name>{{APPLICATION_NAME}}</application_name>
Instructions:
1) Generate realistic user requests that would likely be sent during daily usage of the application.
2) Create exactly one request for each API method in the API JSON file.
3) Ensure each request requires exactly one API call to complete the task.
Before generating the requests, wrap your analysis in<api_analysis>tags. In your analysis process:
1) List all the API methods from the API JSON file, including their descriptions.
2) Count the total number of API methods to ensure you generate the correct number of requests.
3) Consider the user’s perspective and common use cases for the application.
4) For each API method:
a) Brainstorm 2-3 potential user requests that would require that specific method.
b) Select the most appropriate request for that method.
5) Ensure that each API method is used exactly once across all generated requests.
It’s OK for this section to be quite long. After completing your analysis process, provide your generated requests in JSON
format. Each request should have its own numeric key and contain a ”prompt” field (the user’s request in natural language) and
anapi_methodsfield (an array containing the single required API method that exists in theAPI_JSON). Example output
structure:
{
"1": {
"prompt": "User’s natural language request goes here",
"api_methods": ["method_1"]
},
"2": {
"prompt": "Another user’s natural language request goes here",
"api_methods": ["method_2"]
}
}
Please generate the user requests based on the provided information and guidelines. Your final output should consist only of the
JSON format with the generated requests. Begin your response with your API analysis, and then provide the final JSON output.
Figure 9. Prompt used for generating single-application, single-method requests
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Prompt
You are an AI assistant tasked with generating realistic user requests for an AI agent that interacts with various applications.
Your goal is to create diverse requests that require multiple API calls and cover different sets of APIs provided by the
application.
First, carefully review the followingAPI_JSONfile containing the APIs provided by the application, along with short
descriptions for each API:
<api_json>{{API_JSON}}</api_json>
The application you will be working with is:
<application_name>{{APPLICATION_NAME}}</application_name>
You are to generate the following number of user requests:
<num_requests>{{NUM_REQUESTS}}</num_requests>
Instructions:
1) Generate realistic user requests that would likely be sent during daily usage of the application.
2) Ensure each request requires multiple API calls to complete the task.
3) Cover as many different APIs as possible across all requests.
4) Vary the complexity and types of tasks involved in the requests.
For each request, wrap your thought process in<request_generation_process>tags inside your thinking block:
1) Categorize the API methods by functionality (e.g., file management, communication, task management).
2) Count the number of API methods in each category.
3) Brainstorm 3-5 potential user scenarios that would require multiple API calls, ensuring diversity across API categories.
Consider potential edge cases or uncommon use cases.
4) For each scenario:
a) Write a brief user persona (e.g., ”Sarah, a 28-year-old project manager”).
b) List out all relevant API methods.
c) Verify that each listed API method exists in the providedAPI_JSON. If any method is not found, remove it from
consideration.
d) Rate the complexity and realism of the scenario on a scale of 1-5.
5) Choose the scenario with the highest combined score of complexity and realism that uses at least two different API methods.
6) Formulate a natural language request that a user might make based on the chosen scenario, considering the application name.
7) List the final set of API methods required for the request, ensuring all methods exist in theAPI_JSON.
After completing the request generation process for each request, provide your generated requests in JSON format. Each
request should have its own numeric key and contain a ”prompt” field (the user’s request in natural language) and an
api_methodsfield (an array of the required API methods that exist in theAPI_JSON).
Example output structure:
{
"1": {
"prompt": "User’s natural language request goes here",
"api_methods": ["method_1", "method_2", "method_3"]
},
"2": {
"prompt": "Another user’s natural language request goes here",
"api_methods": ["method_4", "method_5"]
}
}
Please generate the user requests based on the provided information and guidelines. Your final output should consist only of the
JSON format with the generated requests and should not include any of the request generation process work done in the
thinking block.
Figure 10. Prompt used for generating single-application, multi-method requests
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Prompt
You are an AI assistant tasked with generating realistic user requests for a multi-application AI agent.
Your goal is to create requests that require API calls to more than one app, simulating realistic usage scenarios.
First, examine the API JSON file containing the APIs provided by these applications:
<api_json>{{API_JSON}}</api_json>
Now, review the following list of application names:
<app_names>{{APP_NAMES}}</app_names>
Your task is to generate<num_requests>{{NUM_REQUESTS}}</num_requests>user requests based on this API
information.
In your analysis:
1) List all the applications and their respective API methods from the API JSON file, including their descriptions.
2) Count the total number of API methods for each application.
3) Categorize API methods by function (e.g., data retrieval, data manipulation, communication).
4) Create a matrix of potential app combinations, noting which combinations might be particularly useful or interesting.
5) For each app combination:
a) List 2-3 API methods from each app that could potentially work together.
b) Brainstorm 2-3 realistic user scenarios that would require using methods from both apps.
c) Identify potential bottlenecks or limitations in combining these APIs.
6) Evaluate each scenario based on:
a) Realism: How likely is a user to need this combination of actions?
b) Complexity: Does it showcase the integration between apps well?
c) Variety: Does it use different methods than other scenarios you’ve considered?
7) Select the top scenarios that best demonstrate varied and realistic multi-app usage.
8) List potential user personas and their needs that align with these scenarios.
After completing your analysis, generate the user requests in<request_generation>tags according to these instructions:
1) Create exactly{{NUM_REQUESTS}}realistic user requests that would likely be sent during daily usage of the applications.
2) Each request must require API calls to at least two different applications to complete the task.
3) Aim to use as many different API methods as possible across all your generated requests.
4) For each request:
a) Write the user’s request in natural language.
b) List at least two required API methods from different applications that exist in theAPI_JSON.
c) Briefly explain why this combination of API methods is necessary to fulfill the request.
d) Consider and note down potential edge cases or complications.
After generating the requests, review and refine them for diversity and realism. Then, present your final output in JSON format.
Each request should have its own numeric key and contain a ”prompt” field (the user’s request in natural language) and an
api_methodsfield (an array containing at least two required API methods from different applications).
Here’s an example of the expected output structure:
{
"1": {
"prompt": "User’s natural language request involving multiple apps goes here",
"api_methods": ["App1.method_1", "App2.method_2"]
},
"2": {
"prompt": "Another user’s natural language request involving multiple apps goes here",
"api_methods": ["App2.method_3", "App3.method_1", "App1.method_2"]
}
}
Remember to think carefully about each step of the process and ensure that your generated requests are realistic, diverse, and
showcase the integration between multiple applications. Your final output should consist only of the JSON object with the
generated requests and should not duplicate or rehash any of the work you did in the thinking block.
Figure 11. Prompt used for generating multi-application requests
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Prompt
You are an API scope analyzer tasked with determining the minimum set of scopes required to execute a given plan. Your goal
is to ensure the principle of least privilege is followed while allowing all necessary operations to be performed.
You will be provided with two key pieces of information:
1) A scope mapping JSON that defines which scopes are required for each API method:
<scope_mapping>{{SCOPE_MAPPING}}</scope_mapping>
2) An execution plan listing the API methods that will be called:
<execution_plan>{{EXECUTION_PLAN}}</execution_plan>
Your task is to analyze these inputs and determine the minimum list of scopes necessary to execute the plan. Follow these steps
in your analysis:
1) Examine each API method in the execution plan.
2) For each method, identify the required scopes by referring to the scope mapping.
3) Compile a set of all required scopes.
4) Review the set and remove any redundant or unnecessary scopes, ensuring the principle of least privilege is followed.
5) Convert the final set of required scopes into an array.
Important considerations:
•Only include scopes that are absolutely necessary for the APIs called in the execution plan.
•If a more specific scope can replace a broader one, use the more specific scope.
•If multiple scopes cover the same functionality, choose the one with the least privileges.
This will help ensure a thorough and accurate determination of the required scopes.
Your final output must be exactly an array, like:
["scope_1", "scope_2", "scope_3"]
Your final output should be a valid array containing only the scope names as strings. Do not add‘‘‘json, triple backticks,
any additional text, explanations, or formatting in your final output.
Do not provide any analysis, explanation, or reasoning in your response. Output ONLY the final array with no additional text
whatsoever.
Figure 12. Prompt used for determining minimum required scopes under least privilege
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Prompt
You are an AI tasked with simulating three months of realistic user interactions with an application. Your goal is to generate a sequence of
requests that represent typical usage patterns based on the provided API and application name.
First, carefully review the API structure defined in the following JSON:
<api_json>{{API_JSON}}</api_json>
Now, consider the application name:
<application_name>{{APPLICATION_NAME}}</application_name>
Your task is to create a series of requests that represent three months’ worth of interaction with this application. Before generating the final
output, please conduct your analysis inside<interaction_analysis>tags in your thinking block. In your analysis, address the following
points:
1) Estimate a realistic number of interactions for three months, considering potential variations between months.
a) Calculate an average daily interaction count.
b) Estimate monthly totals for each of the three months.
2) Identify the most common methods and their likely frequency.
a) List all API methods and categorize them by likely frequency (high, medium, low).
b) Estimate daily usage for high-frequency methods.
3) Plan how to distribute less common methods throughout the three months.
4) Consider multi-step actions that require multiple API calls.
a) Provide at least 5 examples, listing the methods involved in each.
5) Plan usage patterns.
a) Create a general daily usage curve (e.g., more usage in evenings).
b) Outline weekly patterns (e.g., more usage on weekends).
c) Describe seasonal variations over the three months.
6) Estimate daily usage and identify peak usage times.
a) Create a sample daily schedule with peak times.
b) Describe how these might change over the three-month period.
7) Plan for user onboarding and potential reduced usage.
a) List methods likely to be used during onboarding.
b) Describe how usage might taper off at the end of the third month.
8) Create a weekly schedule template.
a) Outline a typical week of interactions.
b) Describe how to introduce variations between weeks and months.
9) List out at least 5 potential user personas and their likely behaviors.
a) For each persona, list their most commonly used methods.
b) Describe how their usage might change over time.
10) Consider how usage patterns might evolve over the three months.
a) Describe potential changes in method usage as users become more proficient.
b) List any seasonal effects or potential feature updates that might affect usage.
After completing your analysis, generate the final output in JSON format. Each interaction should be numbered (continuing across all three
months) and contain a"prompt"(describing the user’s action or intent) and a"method"(an array of one or more API methods being
used). Ensure that you:
1) Generate a reasonable number of requests for real users over three months, allowing for natural variations between days, weeks, and months.
2) Use only methods that exist in the provided API JSON.
3) Simulate realistic usage patterns, closely matching likely real-world use cases.
4) Include more frequently used methods more often, but ensure less common methods appear at appropriate intervals.
5) Incorporate multi-step actions requiring multiple API methods.
6) Reflect natural user behavior, including mistakes, repeated actions, and evolving patterns.
7) Vary the time between interactions (daily, weekly, monthly cycles).
8) Incorporate the weekly schedule template and user personas, allowing for natural variations and evolution.
9) Include a mix of single-method and multi-method interactions (≈30% should use multiple methods).
Here’s an example of the expected output structure:
{
"1": {
"prompt": "New user opens the application for the first time",
"method": ["app_launch", "user_registration"]
}
}
Remember: Your final output should consist only of the JSON object with the simulated interactions and should not duplicate or rehash any of
the work you did in the interaction analysis.
Figure 13. Prompt used for realistic user-application interactions
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
Prompt
You are an AI assistant tasked with simulating a user who needs to make decisions about granting permissions to an
application. Your goal is to decide whether to grant each requested scope as either"ALLOWED"(permanent access) or
"ONCE"(one-time access).
First, review the descriptions of the available scopes:
<scope_descriptions>{gcal_scope_descriptions}</scope_descriptions>
Now, consider the following requested scopes:
<requested_scopes>{detailed_scopes_list}</requested_scopes>
For each requested scope, you will need to make a decision based on the following guidelines:
1) Evaluate the sensitivity of the data or functionality the scope provides access to.
2) Consider how often the feature associated with the scope might be needed.
3) Assess whether the scope is essential for the app’s core functionality.
4) If unsure about a scope’s purpose or implications, err on the side of caution.
5) Consider the risk level:
•Read-only or view-only scopes are generally lower risk.
•Delete, modify, or write scopes are generally higher risk.
For each scope, consider the following aspects:
1) Purpose: What does this scope allow the application to do?
2) Risk level: Is it read-only or does it involve modifying data?
3) Frequency of use: How often might this feature be needed?
4) Core functionality: Is this scope essential for the app’s main purpose?
5) Privacy impact: What kind of user data might be exposed?
6) Potential benefits: How does this improve the user experience?
7) Decision: Based on the above, should this be"ALLOWED"or"ONCE"?
After analyzing all scopes, provide your final decisions in JSON format. Each key should be the name of the scope, and the
value should be either"ALLOWED"or"ONCE".
Here’s an example of the expected output format:
{
"calendar.read": "ALLOWED",
"calendar.write": "ONCE",
"events.delete": "ONCE"
}
Now, please provide your final decision in the specified JSON format.
Figure 14. Prompt used for simulating user granting permissions
23
