--- PAGE 1 ---
ADAPTIVE ROTARY STEERING WITH JOINT AUTOREGRESSION FOR ROBUST
EXTRACTION OF CLOSELY MOVING SPEAKERS IN DYNAMIC SCENARIOS
Jakob Kienegger, Timo Gerkmann
Signal Processing (SP), University of Hamburg, Germany
ABSTRACT
Latest advances in deep spatial filtering for Ambisonics demonstrate
strong performance in stationary multi-speaker scenarios by rotat-
ing the sound field toward a target speaker prior to multi-channel
enhancement. For applicability in dynamic acoustic conditions with
moving speakers, we propose to automate this rotary steering us-
ing an interleaved tracking algorithm conditioned on the target’s
initial direction. However, for nearby or crossing speakers, robust
tracking becomes difficult and spatial cues less effective for en-
hancement. By incorporating the processed recording as additional
guide into both algorithms, our novel joint autoregressive frame-
work leverages temporal-spectral correlations of speech to resolve
spatially challenging speaker constellations. Consequently, our pro-
posed method significantly improves tracking and enhancement
of closely spaced speakers, consistently outperforming compara-
ble non-autoregressive methods on a synthetic dataset. Real-world
recordings complement these findings in complex scenarios with
multiple speaker crossings and varying speaker-to-array distances.
Index Terms—Ambisonics, direction of arrival (DoA), moving
source, multi-channel speech enhancement, speaker extraction.
1. INTRODUCTION
Speech enhancement is dedicated to improving the clarity and com-
prehensibility of a recorded speech signal by removing noise and
reverberation. In challenging acoustic environments with multiple
talkers, known as thecocktail party scenario[1], target speaker ex-
traction (TSE) aims to isolate and enhance the speech of one partic-
ular person. Provided that recordings from a microphone array are
available, spatial cues can be used to resolve the inherent ambiguity
which speaker to enhance and which to suppress. If the speakers are
distinguishable by their orientation to the array, referred to as direc-
tion of arrival (DoA), a spatially selective filter (SSF) can be steered
toward the target to extract their voice. Recent deep, non-linear SSFs
achieve outstanding enhancement performance while retaining com-
putationally efficient neural network (NN) architectures [2–5].
Spherical microphone arrays are able to capture the sound field
in the spherical harmonics representation known as Ambisonics [6].
The underlying property of rotational invariance enables to re-orient
the encoded sound field without physically moving the array. Instead
of an explicit conditioning mechanism to guide a SSF toward the
target speaker, Wang et al. propose to utilize this feature and center
the recording about the desired direction prior to processing [7]. This
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) under Grant 508337379. Computational resources were provided by
the Regional Computer Center (RRZ) of the University of Hamburg and the
Erlangen National High Performance Computing Center (NHR@FAU) under
Project f104ac. NHR is funded by the Federal Government and Bavaria. Both
facilities received DFG funding under Grants 440719683 and 498394658.
so-calledrotary steeringis capable of converting widely used but not
natively steerable multi-channel enhancement architectures such as
McNet [8] or SpatialNet [9] into SSFs without any modification.
Recording scenarios such as a seated conference meeting [10]
may legitimize the assumption that the positions of the speakers re-
main fixed throughout a recording. However, in more general set-
tings like the dinner party considered in [11], the movement of the
speakers becomes non-negligible. To keep using SSFs for TSE, ei-
ther continuous directional information has to be provided, denoted
asstrongguidance, or estimated, e.g., based on the target’s initial di-
rection using a tracking algorithm, which we refer to asweakguid-
ance [12, 13]. However, when speakers are closely spaced or cross
paths, accurate tracking becomes very challenging and the spatial
guidance itself loses efficacy in disentangling the speech signals.
While real-time capability is often a performance-limiting factor
for speech enhancement [14, 15], recent works have capitalized on
the enforced sequential processing style. By incorporating the en-
hanced recording as additional NN input, such autoregressive (AR)
architectures exploit thetemporal-spectralcorrelations of speech to
achieve improved robustness [16–18]. Recently, Shen et al. demon-
strated the effectiveness of utilizing autoregression for multi-channel
speech enhancement in a stationary single-speaker scenario [18].
In this work, we generalize rotary steering from stationary to dy-
namic scenarios by continuously centering the sound field on a mov-
ing target speaker. Using an interleaved tracking algorithm, we auto-
mate this adaptive alignment based solely on the target’s initial ori-
entation. Our novel approach leverages rotary steering as a universal
conditioning mechanism for both tracking and enhancement and is
thereby independent of specific subsystem implementations. By in-
troducing temporal feedback, we demonstrate on a synthetic three-
speaker dataset how the additional guidance from the enhanced sig-
nal improves both tracking and enhancement, especially for closely
spaced sources. As a result, our method outperforms comparable,
non-AR approaches across different architectures, while maintain-
ing robust enhancement in challenging real-world recordings.
2. PROBLEM SETUP
2.1. Ambisonics signal model for target speaker extraction
We assume availability of a recording from a spherical microphone
array, capturing the sound field in the spherical harmonics represen-
tation known as Ambisonics [6]. The observationYcontains the
vectorized coefficients according to canonical Ambisonics channel
number ordering (ACN) [19], which commonly correspond to a real-
valued spherical harmonics basisB N with truncated basis functions
at ordern= N[19]. In this work, we use the harmonics defined as
bm
n (θ, ϕ) =N |m|
n P |m|
n (sin(ϕ))
(
sin(|m|θ), m <0
cos(m θ), m≥0 (1)
arXiv:2601.12345v2  [eess.AS]  21 Jan 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Yt
θ0,ϕ0
D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0 SSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSF
bSt
(a) Fixed rotary steering.
Yt
D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0 TSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTST +
bD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
tbD⊤
t
∆bϕt
∆bθt
bθt , bϕt
θ0,ϕ0
SSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSF
bSt
(b) Adaptive rotary steering utilizing tracking (TST).
Yt
D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0D⊤
0
TSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTSTTST +
bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1bD⊤
t 1
∆bθt 1
∆bϕt 1
bθt 1 bϕt 1
θ0,ϕ0
SSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSFSSF
bSt
z−1
z−1z−1z−1z−1
AR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TSTAR-TST
AR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSFAR-SSF
(c) Integrating the processed signal bSt 1 as additional guide.
Fig. 1: Weakly guided speaker extraction pipelines conditioned on the target’s initial DoA(θ0, ϕ0). Rotary steering is used to direct the spatial
filter (SSF) either constantly toward the initial DoA (fixed) or use tracking (TST) to adjust the steering to the speaker’s movement (adaptive).
for spherical coordinates azimuthθand elevationϕwith associated
Legendre functionsP m
n [6] and−n≤m≤n. Depending on
the definition of normalization factorN m
n ,B N is either an orthog-
onal [19] or orthonormal [20] basis w.r.t. the surface integral inner
product on the unit sphere. For analysis, we decompose observation
Yinto an additive mixture of Ambisonics coefficients correspond-
ing to anechoic target speechSand noiseV. Under the assumption
of a reverberant, multi-speaker scenario, the latter contains interfer-
ing speech signals and reflected components of the target speech.
Withtandkdenoting frame and frequency bins, this acoustic setup
is represented in the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) domain as
Ytk =S tk +V tk .(2)
In this work we set the goal of reconstructing the monopole coeffi-
cient of the anechoic target speech signalS tk, which we indicate as
Stk. Thus, the task of TSE lies in recoveringS tk from the noisy ob-
servationsY tk conditioned on a speaker-specific characteristic.
2.2. Rotary steering for stationary speaker extraction
Spatially selective filters (SSFs) differentiate the target’s speech sig-
nal from interfering sources based on spatially discriminative cues.
In this work, we restrain the cue modality to the target speaker’s rel-
ative orientation to the array, commonly referred to as DoA. In order
to inform deep SSFs of the DoA, a variety of conditioning mecha-
nisms have been proposed [2–5]. Alternatively, when processing in
the Ambisonics domain, the properties of the underlying spherical
harmonics basisB N can be exploited for this purpose. Due to clo-
sure under rotation in SO(3) for any order N [20,21], the sound field
can be aligned toward the target direction by linear transformation as
a means of guiding a downstream SSF. This non-intrusive steering
mechanism, introduced by Wang et al. asrotary steering[7], is capa-
ble of converting arbitrary multi-channel enhancement architectures
into SSFs without any further modification. The rotational trans-
formation is represented by Wigner-D matrices parametrizable, e.g.,
using classical Euler anglesα,β,γ. For a complex-valued spherical
harmonics basis eBN, their entries can be compactly expressed as
eDn
mm′(α, β, γ) =e −jmαdn
mm′(β)e−jm′γ ,(3)
with transcendental Wigner-d functionsd n
mm′ andZYZconvention
for the Euler angles [20, 21]. Following ACN vectorization, these
block-diagonal, unitary Wigner-D matrices eDcan be converted via
change of basis into their orthogonal real-valued counterpartsD[20]
to match the spherical harmonics definition in eq. (1). The alignment
of the sound fieldY tk used in rotary steering is thus achieved by
multiplication with the inverse (i.e., the transpose in this case) ofD,
representing the orientation of target speaker toward array. Leverag-
ing the rotational invariance of Ambisonics signals as input condi-
tioning for spatial audio algorithms sets the foundation of our work.
3. PROPOSED METHOD
3.1. Adaptive and fixed rotary steering for dynamic scenarios
Rotary steering was originally introduced for a stationary scenario
with static speakers [7]. In this work, we generalize this concept to
dynamic acoustic conditions by continuously aligning the observa-
tionY tk with the direction of a moving target. Thisadaptiverotary
steering is performed using time-dependent Wigner-D matricesD t
parameterized by the target’s DoA(θ t, ϕt). Using theZYZEuler
angle convention, this corresponds to an initial rotation aboutY(el-
evation,β=ϕ t) followed byZ(azimuth,α=θ t), yielding
Dt =D(θ t, ϕt,0).(4)
If continuous ground truth directional guidance is available, adaptive
rotary steering can be readily employed to condition a downstream
SSF for TSE. However, in dynamic scenarios with moving speakers,
relying on oracle directional cues throughout the recording signifi-
cantly limits practical applicability. As an alternative, weakly guided
TSE uses only the target’s initial DoA(θ0, ϕ0)[12, 13]. Opposed to
adaptive rotary steering, we definefixedrotary steering as continu-
ously centering the sound fieldY tk at this starting direction using
D0, see fig. 1a. This approach provides a one-time spatial cue, al-
lowing the downstream enhancement algorithm to learn the target’s
temporal-spectral characteristics at the beginning of the recording.
3.2. Weakly guided adaptive rotary steering framework
Instead of using temporal-spectral cues throughout the recording, re-
cent works such as [2, 3] underline the significant performance po-
tential of spatial guidance under well defined conditions. Thus, in
our own previous work for TSE but also for the related task of speech
separation in [3], an upstream tracking algorithm is included to esti-
mate the missing temporal evolution of the directional cues and pro-
vide continuous guidance to a downstream SSF. However, instead of
adapting existing deep sound source localization (SSL) architectures
for target speaker tracking (TST), we propose employing fixed ro-
tary steering by centering the NN input at the target’s initial direction
(θ0, ϕ0). As with the SSF, this approach can be applied to any SSL
method without the need for integrating an additional conditioning
mechanism. The alignment with the target’s initial direction turns
the task of the TST algorithm into estimating the time-dependent
angular deviation
 
∆bθt,∆bϕt

. After unification with the starting
direction, the downstream SSF can now be continuously steered via
bDt =D

θ0+∆bθt, ϕ0+∆bϕt,0

,(5)
yielding the weakly guided TSE pipeline displayed in fig. 1b.

--- PAGE 3 ---
3.3. Additional guidance via temporal-spectral autoregression
While directionally guided SSFs achieve outstanding enhancement
for sufficiently spaced speakers, as they move closer or cross, the
DoA becomes increasingly difficult to estimate and less discrimina-
tive. We propose to exploit thetemporal-spectralpattern of speech
to improve the differentiation of speakers under such challenging
conditions, which is beneficial for both tracking and enhancement.
AR-SSFUnder the assumption of a sequential processing style,
the previously enhanced signal bSt 1 can be utilized as an additional
input to a deep speech enhancement architecture. Whereas prior
work has focused on multi-channel, single-speaker scenarios [18],
we generalize this approach to TSE, arguing that the temporal cor-
relation between the spectral structure ofbSt 1 and observationY t is
particularly useful to disentangle spatially ambiguous constellations,
such as when speakers cross. Figure 1c illustrates our proposed AR
modification of the SSF, denoted asAR-SSF, in which we concate-
natebSt 1 as an additional channel to the rotated noisy inputY t.
AR-TSTPrevious works could demonstrate the potential of us-
ing a pre-processed recording for DoA estimation. By extracting
the direct-path propagation of the target signal prior to localization,
computationally lightweight, statistics-based algorithms achieve
dramatic performance improvements [13, 22]. However, due to con-
tinuously centering the sound field in adaptive rotary steering, the
target signal’s anechoic propagation is trivial and bears no spatial
information. Instead, just as for the AR-SSF, we propose to provide
the processed speech signalbSt 1 as supplementary conditioning to a
deep tracking algorithm. By approximating the rotation matrices as
bDt ≈ bDt 1 ,(6)
the input modalitiesbSt 1 andY t 1 are aligned in time, providing the
TST algorithm with the matched spectral pattern of the target speech
to the noisy recording. We propose that this helps consistent tracking
of the target and minimizes speaker confusions for spatially close
interferer. Figure 1c displays the resulting AR interconnection from
processed signal to TST algorithm, which we denote asAR-TST.
4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
4.1. Dataset
Synthetic datasetIn order to facilitate NN training and evalua-
tion in a controlled acoustic scenario, we create a synthetic dataset
consisting of reverberant three-speaker mixtures. Each simulated
recording consists of utterances from the LibriSpeech corpus [23]
paired according to Libri3Mix [24]. We use the image method [25]
to spatialize the speech signals for shoe-box shaped rooms with re-
verberation times between 0.2 s and 0.5 s. In particular, our imple-
mentation builds upon gpuRIR [26] and computes the Ambisonics
coefficients of the image sources by expanding their Green’s func-
tion into the harmonics in eq. (1) under far-field assumptions [27].
Together with ACN, we choose the normalization factorsN m
n to be
compliant with the ambiX format [19] and restrain the simulation to
first order Ambisonics (FOA), thus,N = 1. The movement of the
speakers is modeled via randomized, sinusoidal trajectories accord-
ing to Diaz et al. in [28], which are able to generate diverse motion
patterns as demonstrated in fig. 2 and our project webpage 1. At the
start, the speakers are separated by at least 15° and their distance to
the microphone array remains in the range of 1 m to 3 m throughout
the recording. The step-size for the temporal discretization of the
trajectories is aligned with the STFT parametrization, for which we
use a square-root Hann window of length32 msand16 mshop-size.
0 2 4 6
-180
0
180
0 3 6 9
0
3
6
0 2 4 6
0 3 6
0 2 4 6
0 3 6
0 2 4 6
0 3 6
time [s]
room width [m]
DoAθ t [°]
length [m]
mic. array oracle trajectory / start/stop
Fig. 2: Synthetic three-speaker ( / / ) dataset modeling continuous
motion [28]. Tracking performance is shown for azimuth DoAθ t
using non-AR ( ) and our AR modification ( ) of SELDnet [30].
Recorded datasetTo test generalizability and robustness in real-
world scenarios, we also include recordings with human speakers for
evaluation. We use a FOA microphone array, which we place cen-
tered in a room measuring9.5 m×5.1 m×2.4 m, with a reverber-
ation time of 0.35 s. Two male and one female non-native English
speakers are instructed to simultaneously read out segments from the
Rainbow Passage [29] while randomly moving in the frontal plane
of the array, resulting in multiple speaker crossings and significantly
varying speaker-to-array distances per recording. We split the Rain-
bow Passage into 3 segments of roughly equal length and permute
these among all three speakers, yielding 3 recordings of about 30 s
each. Videos of all recordings can be found on our project page1.
4.2. Algorithm implementation and optimization details
Spatially selective filterWe demonstrate the generalizability of
our methods using the two established multi-channel enhancement
models McNet [8] and SpatialNet [9]. Although lacking directional
conditioning, rotary steering enables their use as SSFs by applying
a network-agnostic pre-processing step to the noisy Ambisonics in-
put. We adopt causal variants of both, employing the Mamba state-
space models for narrow-band processing in SpatialNet [31]. Table 1
compares model size and computational cost measured in multiply-
accumulate operations (MACs) between the two NNs. In both cases,
the additional input channel for the AR-SSFs only lead to a minimal
increase of less than 1 % in model parameters and 1.5 % in MACs.
Target speaker trackingWe choose the convolutional-recurrent
architecture SELDnet [32] as baseline model for TST. Originally
proposed for the composite sound event localization and detec-
tion (SELD) task, we adapt it for our setup by removing the sound
event detection output and employing the causal implementation
from [30]. The resulting lightweight model has less than 300 k pa-
rameters and 70 M/s MACs for both non-AR and AR versions.
Training strategyTo guarantee a robust interplay between track-
ing and enhancement algorithms, a joint training approach is neces-
sary [12,13]. Instead of fine-tuning, we use a dual-optimization strat-
egy with a single forward pass through the full pipeline, followed
by backpropagation via individual optimizers for SSF and TST. To
avoid the inherent non-parallelizability of the AR methods, we use
recurrent deep stacking as pseudo-AR training framework [18]. We
adhere to the original loss functions and learning rate schedulers for
optimizing McNet [8], SpatialNet [31] and SELDnet [32]. Training
runs for up to 100 epochs or until convergence, which we define as
no improvement for 10 consecutive epochs with either optimizer.
1 https://sp-uhh.github.io/adaptive-rotary-steering/

--- PAGE 4 ---
Pipeline[McNet/SpatialNet]Performance
IDTracking AR-SSF AR-TST Params [M] MACs [G/s] PESQ↑ESTOI [%]↑
− − − − −1.08 31.6
Oracle✗−1.84/1.74 29.9/18.7 2.08/2.27 77.7/83.0
Oracle✓−1.86/1.74 30.3/18.82.21/2.38 80.4/84.7
−✗−1.84/1.74 29.9/18.7 1.97/2.11 75.1/80.3
−✓−1.86/1.74 30.3/18.82.08/2.21 78.5/82.2
SELDnet✗ ✗2.13/2.03 30.0/18.8 1.98/2.11 75.5/80.6
SELDnet✗ ✓2.13/2.03 30.0/18.8 2.03/2.18 76.6/81.6
SELDnet✓ ✓2.15/2.03 30.3/18.82.17/2.27 79.5/82.7
Table 1: Model complexity and performance on our synthetic data-
set for various speaker extraction approaches and implementations.
5. RESULTS
We use our synthetic dataset for a detailedanalysisand lab record-
ings to assess real-worldgeneralizability. In both cases, we focus on
perceptual quality and intelligibility as key performance measures.
Synthetic datasetWith paired ground truth anechoic speech
signals, we use the standard intrusive metrics PESQ [33] and
ESTOI [34] to measure speech quality and intelligibility, respec-
tively. Table 1 and fig. 4 summarize the speaker extraction results
for all evaluated methods, with the strongly guided serving as an
upper bound for their weakly guided counterparts. Both McNet and
SpatialNet demonstrate the effectiveness of continuous ground truth
directional conditioning (
 ,
 ), achieving significant improvements
over solely using the initial DoA (
 ,
 ). However, guidance with
SELDnet as tracking algorithm (
 ) yields only marginal benefits
over fixed rotary steering (
 ). As shown in fig. 3 (
 ) with utterance-
wise mean angular error (MAE), SELDnet performs especially
poorly for closely spaced speakers, likely due to limited model ca-
pacity. Although resulting in only a negligible increase in complex-
ity, the AR integration of the enhanced speech using our proposed
AR-TST framework substantially improves tracking of SELDnet for
nearby speakers, see fig. 3 (
 ) complemented by the sample trajec-
tories in fig. 2 and our project page1. Consequently, the downstream
SSF is able to leverage directional guidance to a greater extent, fa-
cilitating superior extraction quality. By incorporating the processed
speech signal as input to the SSF, AR-SSF (
 ) yields even greater
improvements over tracking-based methods (
 ,
 ) in these scenar-
ios. This is most evident for McNet, suggesting that input concate-
nation at each sublayer [8] strongly facilitates temporal-spectral cue
integration. The results for both AR-TST and AR-SSF underline the
critical role of spectral cues in spatially challenging speaker scenar-
ios. Combining these approaches into a novel,jointAR framework
(
 ) yields consistent improvements across all other weakly guided
methods (
 ,
 ,
 ,
 ). As a result, our proposed joint AR approach
(
 ) achieves parity for SpatialNet and substantial improvements for
McNet over their non-AR, but strongly guided counterparts (
 ).
Average angular distance to closest interfering speaker [◦]
[0, 15) [45, 90) [135, 180]
MAE [◦]←
0
2
4
6
8
10
[0, 15) [45, 90) [135, 180]
PESQ→
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
Fig. 3: Tracking (MAE) and enhancement (PESQ) performance de-
pendency of McNet on the distance to the closest interfering speaker.
We report the sample mean with 95% confidence interval error bars.
McNet SpatialNet
∆PESQ→
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
McNet SpatialNet
∆ESTOI [%]→40
44
48
52
Fig. 4: Strongly guided (
 ,
 ), fixed (
 ,
 ) and adaptive (
 ,
 ,
 )
weakly guided extraction using different enhancement algorithms.
We report the sample mean with 95% confidence interval error bars.
Recorded datasetDue to the lack of paired ground truth speech
for our lab recordings, we employ a non-intrusive metric to as-
sess perceptual enhancement quality. In particular, we choose
NISQA [35], a data-driven estimator of the subjective mean opinion
score, which is trained on labeled datasets with human listening test
results. As a measure of intelligibility, we leverage the transcrip-
tion of a downstream automatic speech recognition (ASR) system
to compute the word error rate (WER) relative to the Rainbow Pas-
sage reference segments. We employ the lightweight ASR model
QuartzNet15x5Base-Enfrom the NeMo toolkit [36], which is
trained solely on clean and telephony conversational English speech
and therefore particularly sensitive to signal distortions. Figure 5
presents the enhancement results in terms of perceptual quality
(NISQA) and intelligibility (WER) using weakly guided speaker
extraction methods employing adaptive rotary steering. Overall,
the lab recordings complement the trends observed on the synthetic
dataset, showing clear improvements from the non-AR approach
(
 ), through the integration of AR-TST (
 ), to the combined joint
AR pipeline (
 ). Listening tests, which are accessible on our project
page1, reveal that the performance differences are especially evident
in the latter portion of the 30 s samples. While our proposed joint
AR pipeline (
 ) robustly recovers from speaker crossings and large
signal-to-noise variations, the non-AR approach (
 ) frequently loses
the target speaker, resulting in spectral leakage and speaker confu-
sions. Thus, by deliberately including a large number of crossings
and consistently close distances between speakers, the benefits from
jointtemporal-spectralguidance become particularly apparent.
NISQA→
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
− McNet SpatialNet
WER [%]←0
25
50
75
100
− McNet SpatialNet
Fig. 5: Sample means of unprocessed (
 ) and adaptive, weakly
guided extraction methods (
 ,
 ,
 ) evaluated on real-world record-
ings regarding speech quality (NISQA) and intelligibility (WER).
6. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a novel speaker extraction approach in
the Ambisonics domain for dynamic scenarios with moving speak-
ers. By introducingfixedandadaptiverotary steering, we could
leverage the rotational invariance of Ambisonics for both track-
ing and enhancement, ensuring broad applicability across algorith-
mic implementations.Autoregressivelyincorporating the processed
speech signal, we achieved substantial improvements particularly
for closely spaced speakers. As a result, our method outperformed
comparable non-autoregressive approaches and demonstrated robust
enhancement in challenging real-world recordings with multiple
speaker crossings and varying distance between speakers and array.

--- PAGE 5 ---
7. REFERENCES
[1] E. C. Cherry, “Some experiments on the recognition of speech,
with one and two ears,”J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 25, 1953.
[2] K. Tesch and T. Gerkmann, “Multi-channel speech separation
using spatially selective deep non-linear filters,”IEEE/ACM
TASLP, vol. 32, 2024.
[3] A. Bohlender, A. Spriet, W. Tirry, and N. Madhu, “Spatially
selective speaker separation using a DNN with a location de-
pendent feature extraction,”IEEE/ACM TASLP, vol. 32, 2024.
[4] A. Pandey, S. Lee, J. Azcarreta, D. Wong, and B. Xu, “All neu-
ral low-latency directional speech extraction,” inInterspeech,
2024.
[5] R. Gu and Y . Luo, “ReZero: Region-customizable sound ex-
traction,”IEEE/ACM TASLP, vol. 32, 2024.
[6] F. Zotter and M. Frank,Ambisonics: A Practical 3D Audio
Theory for Recording, Studio Production, Sound Reinforce-
ment, and Virtual Reality. Springer, 2019.
[7] S. Wang, H. Qiu, X. Song, M. Wang, and F. Yao, “Ambison-
ics neural speech extraction with directional feature and rotary
steering,”Applied Acoustics, vol. 228, 2025.
[8] Y . Yang, Q. Changsheng, and X. li, “McNet: Fuse multiple
cues for multichannel speech enhancement,” inIEEE ICASSP,
2023.
[9] C. Quan and X. Li, “SpatialNet: Extensively learning spatial
information for multichannel joint speech separation, denois-
ing and dereverberation,”IEEE/ACM TASLP, vol. 32, 2024.
[10] Z. Chen, T. Yoshioka, L. Lu, T. Zhou, Z. Meng, Y . Luo, J. Wu,
X. Xiao, and J. Li, “Continuous speech separation: Dataset and
analysis,” inIEEE ICASSP, 2020.
[11] J. Barker, S. Watanabe, E. Vincent, and J. Trmal, “The
fifth ’CHiME’ speech separation and recognition challenge:
Dataset, task and baselines,” inInterspeech, 2018.
[12] J. Kienegger and T. Gerkmann, “Steering deep non-linear spa-
tially selective filters for weakly guided extraction of moving
speakers in dynamic scenarios,” inInterspeech, 2025.
[13] J. Kienegger, A. Mannanova, H. Fang, and T. Gerkmann, “Self-
steering deep non-linear spatially selective filters for efficient
extraction of moving speakers under weak guidance,” inIEEE
WASPAA, 2025.
[14] Y . Luo and N. Mesgarani, “Conv-TasNet: Surpassing ideal
time–frequency magnitude masking for speech separation,”
IEEE/ACM TASLP, vol. 27, 2019.
[15] R. Chao, W.-H. Cheng, M. L. Quatra, S. M. Siniscalchi, C.-
H. H. Yang, S.-W. Fu, and Y . Tsao, “An investigation of in-
corporating Mamba for speech enhancement,” inIEEE Spoken
Language Tech. Workshop, 2024.
[16] P. Andreev, N. Babaev, A. Saginbaev, I. Shchekotov, and
A. Alanov, “Iterative autoregression: A novel trick to improve
your low-latency speech enhancement model,” inInterspeech,
2023.
[17] Z. Pan, G. Wichern, F. G. Germain, K. Saijo, and J. Le
Roux, “PARIS: Pseudo-autoregressive siamese training for on-
line speech separation,” inInterspeech, 2024.
[18] P. Shen, X. Zhang, and Z.-Q. Wang, “ARiSE: Auto-regressive
multi-channel speech enhancement,” inInterspeech, 2025.
[19] C. Nachbar, F. Zotter, E. Deleflie, and A. Sontacchi, “ambiX
- A suggested Ambisonics format,” inAmbisonics Symposium,
2011.
[20] Z. Su and P. Coppens, “Rotation of real spherical harmonics,”
Foundations of Crystallography, vol. 50, 1994.
[21] B. Rafaely and M. Kleider, “Spherical microphone array beam
steering using Wigner-D weighting,”IEEE Signal Proc. Let-
ters, vol. 15, 2008.
[22] S. S. Battula, H. Taherian, A. Pandey, D. Wong, B. Xu, and
D. Wang, “Robust frame-level speaker localization in rever-
berant and noisy environments by exploiting phase difference
losses,” inIEEE ICASSP, 2025.
[23] V . Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Lib-
rispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio
books,” inIEEE ICASSP, 2015.
[24] J. Cosentino, M. Pariente, S. Cornell, A. Deleforge, and E. Vin-
cent, “Librimix: An open-source dataset for generalizable
speech separation,” preprint arXiv:2005.11262, 2020.
[25] J. Allen and D. Berkley, “Image method for efficiently simulat-
ing small-room acoustics,”J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 65, 1979.
[26] D. Diaz-Guerra, A. Miguel, and J. R. Beltr ´an, “gpuRIR: A
Python library for room impulse response simulation with GPU
acceleration,”Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 80,
2018.
[27] B. Rafaely,Fundamentals of Spherical Array Processing.
Springer, 2019.
[28] D. Diaz-Guerra, A. Miguel, and J. R. Beltran, “Robust sound
source tracking using SRP-PHAT and 3D convolutional neural
networks,”IEEE/ACM TASLP, vol. 29, 2021.
[29] G. Fairbanks,Voice and Articulation Drillbook. Harper, 1960.
[30] M. Yasuda, S. Saito, A. Nakayama, and N. Harada, “6DoF
SELD: Sound event localization and detection using micro-
phones and motion tracking sensors on self-motioning human,”
inIEEE ICASSP, 2024.
[31] C. Quan and X. Li, “Multichannel long-term streaming neu-
ral speech enhancement for static and moving speakers,”IEEE
Signal Proc. Letters, vol. 31, 2024.
[32] S. Adavanne, A. Politis, J. Nikunen, and T. Virtanen, “Sound
event localization and detection of overlapping sources using
convolutional recurrent neural networks,”IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Signal Proc., vol. 13, 2019.
[33] A. Rix, J. Beerends, M. Hollier, and A. Hekstra, “Perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (PESQ)-a new method for speech
quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs,” inIEEE
ICASSP, 2001.
[34] J. Jensen and C. H. Taal, “An algorithm for predicting the in-
telligibility of speech masked by modulated noise maskers,”
IEEE/ACM TASLP, vol. 24, 2016.
[35] G. Mittag, B. Naderi, A. Chehadi, and S. M ¨oller, “NISQA: A
deep CNN-self-attention model for multidimensional speech
quality prediction with crowdsourced datasets,” inInterspeech,
2021.
[36] O. Kuchaiev, J. Li, H. Nguyen, O. Hrinchuk, R. Leary, B. Gins-
burg, S. Kriman, S. Beliaev, V . Lavrukhin, J. Cook, P. Cas-
tonguay, M. Popova, J. Huang, and J. M. Cohen, “NeMo:
A toolkit for building AI applications using neural modules,”
2019.
