--- PAGE 1 ---
Agile asymmetric multi-legged locomotion: contact
planning via geometric mechanics and spin model
duality
Jackson Habala 1, Gabriel B. Margolis 2, Tianyu Wang3, Pratyush Bhatt 1, Juntao He 3, Naheel Naeem 1,
Zhaochen Xu 3, Pulkit Agrawal 2, Daniel I. Goldman 3, Di Luo 4,∗, Baxi Chong 1,∗
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
2MIT Improbable AI Lab, Maschusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3Department of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
4Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 10084, P.R. China
Abstract—Legged robot research is presently focused primarily
on bipedal or quadrupedal robots, despite longstanding capabil-
ities to build robots with many more legs to potentially improve
locomotion performance. This imbalance is not necessarily due
to hardware limitations, but rather to the absence of principled
control frameworks that explain when and how additional
legs improve locomotion performance. In multi-legged systems,
coordinating many (redundant) simultaneous contacts introduces
a severe curse of dimensionality that challenges existing modeling
and control approaches. As an alternative, multi-legged robots
are typically controlled using low-dimensional gaits originally
developed for bipeds or quadrupeds. These strategies fail to
exploit the new symmetries and control opportunities that
emerge in higher-dimensional systems, leading to only marginal
performance gains despite substantially increased morphological
complexity. In this work, we develop a principled framework for
discovering new control structures in multi-legged locomotion.
We use geometric mechanics to reduce contact-rich locomotion
planning to a graph optimization problem, and propose a spin
model duality framework from statistical mechanics to exploit
symmetry breaking and guide optimal gait reorganization. Using
this approach, we identify an asymmetric locomotion strategy
for a hexapod robot that achieves a forward speed of 0.61
body lengths per cycle (a 50% improvement over conventional
gaits). The resulting asymmetry appears at both the control
and hardware levels. At the control level, the body orienta-
tion oscillates asymmetrically between fast clockwise and slow
counterclockwise turning phases for forward locomotion. At the
hardware level, two legs on the same side remain unactuated and
can be replaced with rigid parts without degrading performance.
Numerical simulations and robophysical experiments validate the
framework and reveal novel locomotion behaviors that emerge
from symmetry reforming in high-dimensional embodied systems.
I. Introduction
As the cost of motors and sensors continues to decline,
building robots with redundant actuation has become in-
creasingly feasible [38]. However, feasibility alone does not
establish necessity. While adding actuators can intuitively
improve stability and robustness, similar benefits can often
be achieved through advances in perception and control. In-
deed, recent progress has demonstrated highly capable bipedal
*Corresponding authors.
Fig. 1.Multi-legged robot: a hexapod model.(a) Geometric and (b)
robophysical hexapod model. (c) Two physics-informed alternative designs
in which two legs are replaced by non-actuated rigid appendages, achieving
forward locomotion performance identical to the fully actuated hexapod. (d)
Field deployment under a tomato plant.
and quadrupedal locomotion using data-driven methods [23,
2, 20] and model-based control algorithms [10, 7]. Despite
the prevalence of hexapods in biology (more than half of
all known species possess 6 legs [25]), robotic research in
academia and industry remains largely focused on few-legged
systems [18]. This disparity raises a fundamental question:
Given the demonstrated success of few-legged robots, what
functional advantages, if any, do additional legs provide?
We attribute our limited understanding of multi-legged
robots to the lack of scalable tools to coordinate and con-
trol these systems. Simply adding legs does not guarantee
improved locomotion; capturing their benefits requires con-
trollers that effectively coordinate the additional degrees of
freedom [8, 9]. Multi-legged locomotion entails coordinating
many appendages that make and break contact with the envi-
ronment, giving rise to contact-rich dynamics [4]. The number
of possible contact sequences grows rapidly with leg count,
arXiv:2602.09123v1  [cs.RO]  9 Feb 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
leading to an explosive increase in coordination complexity.
For example, a hexapod can employ on the order of 10 89
distinct contact sequences (see SI, Sec. S1), making exhaustive
planning or control impractical. Consequently, most existing
approaches to hexapod locomotion rely on gait principles
adapted from bipedal or quadrupedal robots, which limit our
exploration of multi-legged functionality [35, 6].
Gait principles developed for bipedal and quadrupedal
robots typically rely on strict assumptions of symmetry that are
essential for few-legged locomotion [9, 15, 14, 1]. The most
common is contralateral symmetry, in which left and right legs
on the same body segment perform identical motions subject
to a phase offset. Under this assumption, whole-body yaw
moments generated from the left and right sides are balanced,
resulting in straight-line motion. While contralateral symmetry
may be necessary for achieving straight-line locomotion in
few-legged systems, multi-legged robots, such as hexapods,
contain a richer set of symmetries. For example, diagonal
and middle-leg reflection symmetries can also generate net
forward motion without relying on strict left–right pairing [37].
Existing control methods have largely failed to exploit these
additional symmetries [30, 17, 13], leaving the benefits of
deliberately breaking contralateral symmetry unexplored.
In this paper, we develop a physics-informed framework to
answer this question: What benefits arise from the new sym-
metries available in redundant leg systems? We choose a hexa-
pod robot with two body-bending joints as a representative
system. To break down the large contact space of the hexapod,
we employ geometric mechanics (a framework rooted in differ-
ential geometry and geometric phase) to transform the contact-
planning problem of multiple legs into a graph optimization
problem. Leveraging spatiotemporal symmetries in locomo-
tion, we further map this graph optimization problem to a
special class of spin models, which allow us to obtain globally
optimal gaits in polynomial time. Using this framework, we
identify gait patterns that generate net forward motion through
asymmetric left–right leg coordination. The observed gaits
produce short-and-rapid clockwise rotation paired with long-
and-gradual counterclockwise rotation to achieve straight-line
forward locomotion. Experiments show that the resulting gaits
achieve speeds up to 0.61 body lengths per cycle (BL/cyc),
outperforming conventional approaches, including extended
quadrupedal gaits, reinforcement learning–based controllers,
and bio-inspired gaits. Additionally, the observed gaits allow
for two legs to be replaced with rigid parts without reducing lo-
comotion performance (Fig. I(c)). More broadly, our approach
provides a principled tool to analyze multi-legged locomotion
without relying on ad hoc dimensionality reduction, and offers
a quantitative framework for revealing when and why addi-
tional legs fundamentally enhance locomotion performance.
II. Background
Consider a regime of locomotion in which inertial forces
are negligible compared with frictional forces. We refer to this
regime asgeometric locomotion. Prior work has shown that the
relative importance of inertia can be quantified by thecoasting
numberC, defined as the ratio between the coasting time
Fig. 2.Geometric mechanics of hexapod locomotion.(a) Geometric
illustration of hexapod body bending anglesα 1 andα 2 and body velocity
(ξx,ξ y, andξ θ) (b) Shape space of the geometric model parameterized
byα 1, α2. (c.1) Local connection vector field mapping infinitesimal shape
velocities to body-frame velocities. (c.2) Height function over shape space,
given by the curl of the divergence-free component of the connection vector
field; the net displacement for a closed gait is approximated by the signed
area integral of the height function over the enclosed loop. (c.3) Potential
function computed from the curl-free component of the connection vector
field. The displacement associated with a shape change (e.g., from shape A
to shape B) is gait-path-independent and determined by differences in function
values between endpoints. An order-of-magnitude separation exists between
the height function and the potential function over the same shape space.
All panels share identical axes. (d) Experiment trajectory of a hexapod robot
with body undulation evolving without contact changes. In the absence of
contact modulation, the robot undergoes oscillatory body motion with peak-
to-peak displacement of approximately 0.27 body lengths (BL), while the net
displacement over one cycle remains negligible (<0.06 BL).
(the time required for a locomotor to come to rest after self-
deformation ceases) and a characteristic locomotion timescale
(typically the gait cycle period) [33]. In the low-coasting-
number regime (C ≪1), inertial effects can be safely neglected
and locomotion is well described by geometric models. This
regime encompasses a broad class of biological and robotic
systems, including centipede and snake locomotion, and it
remains applicable even at speeds of multiple body lengths
per second [32].
Low-coasting-number locomotion shares a key property
with low-Reynolds-number fluid locomotion [29]: the net
displacement over a gait cycle is determined solely by the
sequenceof shape changes, not by the rate at which those
shape changes are executed. Consequently, the system dynam-
ics depend only on the evolution of body shapes and not on
absolute time scaling. Under this approximation, the equations
of motion [24] reduce to
ξ=A(r) ˙r,(1)
whereξ=[ξ x, ξy, ξθ]T denotes the body velocity in the
forward, lateral, and rotational directions (Fig. 2(a));rdenotes
the internal shape variables (joint angles, e.g.,r=[α 1, α 2] in
Fig. 2);A(r) is the local connection matrix, which encodes
environmental constraints and the conservation of momentum.

--- PAGE 3 ---
The local connection matrixAcan be numerically derived
using resistive force theory (RFT) to model the ground reaction
forces (GRF) [19, 36, 39]. Specifically, the net GRF experi-
enced by the locomotor is the sum of the GRF experienced
by all segments in stance phase (we define a segment to be
in the stance phase if it is in contact with the ground, see
SI, Sec. S1). From the geometry and physics of GRF, reaction
forces of each foot can be calculated from the body velocityξ,
reduced body shaper, and reduced shape velocity ˙r[31, 27].
Assuming quasi-static motion, we consider the total net force
applied to the system is zero at any instant in time [5]:
F=
X
i∈I
Fi (ξ,r, ˙r) =0,(2)
whereIis the collection of all stance-phase feet. Per a given
body shaper, Eq. (2) connects the shape velocity ˙rto the body
velocityξ. Therefore, by the implicit function theorem and
the linearization process, we can numerically derive the local
connection matrixA(r). In our implementation, we compute
the solution of Eq. (2) using the MATLAB functionfsolve.
Importantly, the local connection matrixA(r) is dependent on
the contact patternI.
We then consider the relationship between a gait (a periodic
sequence of shape changes, represented as a closed loop in
Fig. 2(b)) and the resulting body displacement. The displace-
ment along the gait pathχcan be approximated by [12]:
g(T)≈
Z χ(T)
χ(0)
A(r)dr=
Z χ(T)
χ(0)

Ax(r)
Ay(r)
Aθ(r)

dr,(3)
whereA x(r),A y(r),A θ(r) are the three rows of the local
connections, corresponding to forward, lateral, and rotational
vector fields. The accuracy of the approximation in Eq. (3) can
be optimized by properly choosing the body frame [12, 21].
An example vector field (A x) is shown in Fig. 2(c.1). With the
above derivation, the net displacement over a gait period can
be approximated with the line integral along the gait path in
the local connection vector field. Accordingly, we record the
step length in our experiments, defined as the body lengths
traveled per cycle (BL/cyc), to match the per-cycle gait path
optimization.
III. Methods
A. Contact sequence optimization
In the prior section, we only considered the locomotion
problem with a fixed contact pattern, i.e.,Iis independent
of shape variables. Now we consider the locomotion problem
where the contact pattern changes. First, we will explore the
contact planning problem with a known shape change se-
quence. Specifically, letQ= ri,i∈ {1,2, ...M} |r i ∈R 2	 be
a collection of sequenced shape variables. We restrict contact
switches to occur only in one of the designated shape variables
inQ. Considering a gait pathχsequentially connecting all
shapes inQ, we aim to identify the optimal contact sequence
and gait pathχthat maximizes forward displacement.
We first decompose the closed-loop gait pathχinto piece-
wise curvesχ i connectingr i tor i+1. The forward displacement
fromχis then:
∆x=
MX
i=1
Z
χi
Ax
I(i)(r)dr,(4)
whereI(i) is the contact pattern along the piece-wise curves
χi, andA x
I(i) is the forward vector field evaluated at the contact
patternI(i). Note that the optimization in Eq. (4) can be
decoupled and separately optimized:
max
χ,I(χ)
∆x=max
χ,I(χ)
MX
i=1
Z
χi
Ax
I(i)(r)dr(5)
We now consider the decoupled optimization problem.
Specifically, we seek to optimize
R
χi
Ax
I(i)(r)·dr. We argue that,
in most practical applications (particularly in environments
governed by dry Coulomb friction), the vector fieldA x
I(i) can be
well approximated as conservative. Under this approximation,
the resulting displacement is independent of the specific path
χi taken in the shape space and depends only on the endpoints
of the path (Fig. 2(c.3),Shape A to Shape B).
To test this assumption, we use the Hodge-Helmholtz de-
composition theorem [11] to decompose the original vector
field into an irrotational (curl-free) component and a solenoidal
(divergence-free) component:A x
I(i) =A x,i
I(i) +A x,s
I(i). The mag-
nitude ofA x,i
I(i) is characterized by its associated potential
functionP, satisfyingA x,i
I(i) =∇P, such that
R
χi
Ax
I(i)(r)·dr=
P(rend)−P(r start), which is independent of the pathχ i. In
contrast, the magnitude ofA x,s
I(i) is characterized by the height
functionH=∇ ×A x,s
I(i), for which the displacement generated
by a closed-loop pathχcan be estimated by the signed area
enclosed byχweighted byH.
We compute the vector field of the hexapod (lifting front-
left and mid-right legs, Fig. 2(c.1)), along with the corre-
sponding height function (Fig. 2(c.2)) and potential function
(Fig. 2(c.3)). In both gaits, we observe that the scale of the
potential function exceeds that of the height function by more
than an order of magnitude, justifying the approximation of
the vector field as predominantly conservative. Practically,
this implies that although large back-and-forth oscillations in
forward displacement may occur during a gait cycle, the cycle-
average net displacement remains negligible when the contact
pattern is held fixed (illustrated in Fig. 2(c.2) by the path along
the circle). To validate this hypothesis, we track the forward
displacement of a physical hexapod executing a standard body
undulation gait with no contact changes. Despite substantial
oscillatory motion, reaching amplitudes of up to 0.26 body
lengths (BL), the net displacement over one gait cycle remains
negligible (less than 0.06 BL).
Under this approximation, letP x
I(i) denote the potential
function associated with the curl-free component ofA x,i
I(i).
Equation 5 can then be simplified to
max
χ,I(χ)
∆x=max
χ,I(χ)
MX
i=1

Px
I(i)(ri)−P x
I(i)(ri+1)

.(6)
Thus, with linear and decoupled terms, Eq. (6) simplifies the
contact planning problem to a linear optimization problem.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Fig. 3.Gait path mapping.(a) We sample the shape space with a collection
of shape variables{r i}.χ 3 is an example path connection ofr 3 tor 4, only a
fraction of a closed-loop gait path. (b) An example of a cheating gait path
is colored in black. The unique non-cheating gait path is illustrated in red.
(c)(top)Mapping between robot contact pattern and Potts model.(bottom)
Duality between Potts model and Ising model.
B. Shape change sequence optimization
In the previous section, we assumed a pre-fixed shape
change sequence and formulated a linear optimization problem
for contact planning. Here, we explore the shape change
sequence optimization. First, we sample shapes in the shape
space. LetQ all = ri,i∈ {1,2, ...M} |r i ∈R 2	 be
a collection of sampled shape variables (Fig. 3(a)). LetI all
(withNelements) be a collection of contact states of a multi-
legged locomotor. The maximized displacement∆x(C) can be
approximated as:
∆x(C)=max
C,I(C)
X
i∈C

Px
I(i)(rc(i))−P x
I(i)(rc(i+1))

,(7)
whereC⊂Mis the sequence of shape changes, and∆x(C)
is the resulting displacement. Note thatCspecifies not only
the shape elements, but also the sequence of shape changes.
In other words, even with the same elements, there could
still be different combinations of sequences inC. However,
many combinations can be considered as ‘cheating’. For
example, consider a collection of shapes in Fig. 3(b) with two
combinations of sequences colored in red and black. In our
framework, we seek to maximize the displacement withinone
period. Therefore, the black path in Fig. 3(b) has an unfair
advantage over the red path, because the black path winds
around the origin twice in one period. To avoid ‘cheating’, we
define that the shapes can only change in one direction (e.g.,
clockwise). Thus, given elements inC, there is only one valid
path connecting all elements.
In practice, it will always cost finite time and energy to
change contact patterns. To account for this cost, we introduce
some penalties in contact switching to the cost function.
max
C,I(C)

−λS I(C) +
X
i∈C

Px
I(i)(rc(i))−P x
I(i)(rc(i+1))

,(8)
whereS I(C) is the number of contact switches over one period,
andλis some penalty coefficient. We can further simplify the
above optimization problem as a graph optimization problem.
DefineVas a collection of nodesv i j, where the indexjdenotes
the shape and the indexidenotes the contact pattern. At each
time step, we can either change the contact pattern or shape.
Thus, an edge exists connecting two verticesv i j andv kl (ifi=k
andj=l). LetDbe a set of weights on the edges. For an edge
connectingv i j andv il, its weightd i jil =P I(i)(r j)−P I(i)(rl)∈
D. Note that the weightd i jil can be negative. For an edge
connectingv i j andv k j, its weightd i jk j is 0, i.e., changing the
contact pattern at a fixed shape will not cause displacement.
With the above notation, the optimization problem in Eq. (8)
can be reformulated to find a cycle (V,D), such that the sum
of weights along all edges together with−λS I(C) is maximal.
Owing to the path-independence of the connection vec-
tor field, the displacement termd i jil satisfies the following
properties: (1)Antisymmetry:d i jil =−d ili j; and (2)Additivity:
di jil+dilik =d i jik. We exploit these properties to reformulate the
optimization problem using tools from statistical mechanics.
C. Spin model mappings and solutions
In general, the coupled contact planning and the shape
change optimization problem requires a search in a space of
sizeN M, whereNis the number of contact patterns andMis
the number of shape variables. A brute-force search will scale
poorly as the number of legs and joints increases. To obtain
a solution efficiently, we develop a connection between the
gait optimization problem and two well-known spin models
from statistical physics, the Potts model [28] and the Ising
model [26]. In this framework, the optimal shape sequence
is equivalent to the ground state of the spin models. In the
following sections, we describe the mappings to the Potts
model and the Ising model and how it exploits the special
structure of the problem to enable efficient gait optimization.
We start with mapping the shape sequence problem to a
ZN-spin model. A Z N-spin model considers an array ofM
spins sitting onMsites, where each spin hasNinternal
states. Each spin can interact with other spins or experience an
onsite magnetic field. This model is well-known to describe
magnetism in physics, where each spin can be thought of as
a small magnet. In particular, forN=2, it is reduced to the
famous Ising model [26]. It is known that Ising models have
deep connections to graph optimization problems and provide
equivalent formulations of many NP-complete and NP-hard
problems [22].
D. Potts model
If we treat the shape variabler j as the site indexjand the
contact patternI j as the spin internal state, the pair (r j,I j)
can be mapped to a spin variables i
j (or equivalentlys Ii
j in
Fig. 3(c)) at sitej. The displacementP x
I(i)(rc(j) )−P x
I(i)(rc(j+1) )

--- PAGE 5 ---
can be associated with the onsite magnetic field energy
d′
i j(j+1) si
j of the spin variable by definings i
j =e 2πi/N and
d′
i j(j+1) =d i j(j+1) e−2πi/N. Hered ′
i jl is interpreted as the onsite
magnetic field for the Z N-spin model. Since the shape se-
quence optimization problem is defined on a loop, the problem
can be mapped to a Z N-spin model with periodic boundary
conditions as follows:
H=−
X
j
d′
i j(j+1) si
j (9)
The optimal shape sequence that maximizes Eq. (7) is
equivalent to the ground state of the Hamiltonian, i.e., the con-
figuration that minimizes the energy. In this case, the ground
state is achieved by each individual spin:s i
j follows the largest
di j(j+1). This is also known as the greedy solution. Translating
back to the shape sequence language, the greedy algorithm
chooses theI(i) that maximizesP x
I(i)(rc(i))−P x
I(i)(rc(i+1)) for
eachr c(i).
If we further consider the cost of changing contact pattern
with penaltyλin Eq. (8), it is equivalent to introducing a
nearest spin interaction with couplingλ, which gives rise to a
Potts model [28] with a nonuniform magnetic field
Hs =−
X
j
d′
i j(j+1) si
j −λδ si
j,si
j+1
(10)
whereδ si
j,si
j+1
=1 ifs i
j =s i
j+1 and 0 otherwise.
The mapping between the shape sequence and the Potts
model is also described in the upper part of Fig. 3(c). For
this model, the search complexity isN M. The ground state
is expected to have different phenomena depending onλ. For
smallλ, it is disordered, where each spin follows the local
field, and the optimal shape sequence is close to the greedy
solution. For largeλ, the spins align, and it is ferromagnetic.
The optimal shape sequence approaches a uniform gait pattern
or a gait pattern with only a small number of jumps.
E. Ground state duality to Ising model
For the Potts model in Eq. (10), we further define a domain
wallc j+1 to be the existence of a different spin configuration
betweens j ands j+1, wherec j+1 =1 if the domain wall exists
and otherwise 0. The mapping between the Potts model and
the Ising model is shown in the bottom part of Fig. 3(c). It
follows that we can establish the ground state duality between
the Potts model and a long-range Ising model using the domain
wall mapping and the additive property ofd i jl.
Theorem 1.The Potts model in Eq.(10) with d i jl satisfying
the additive property has the same ground state energy as the
following Ising model with long-range couplings J jl.
Hc =−
X
j
J jlc jcl −λ
X
i
ci (11)
where J jl =max idi jl.
Proof.See SI, Sec. S2
In general, the Potts model would not be dual to the Ising
model due to the fact that they have different spin symmetries.
However, duality exists because we only study the ground state
and additive property ofd i jl, which is special in the robotic
contact problem. The mapping reduces the complexity of the
original problem fromN M to 2 M. Based on the Ising model
Hamiltonian, we develop a domain-wall search algorithm.
Domain-wall search algorithm.Specify the number of
domain-walls or jumpsKto be searched. Compute the energy
−P Ji jc jci of allM-site spin configurations that haveK
numbers ofc j =1. Choose the lowest energy configuration
among all as the solution and translate it back to the shape
sequence according to the mapping.
There are several advantages of the duality and the domain-
wall search algorithm. First, it is independent of the number
of shape variablesNso that one can always work with a
lower degree representation Z 2-spin instead of a Z N-spin.
This is particularly helpful for generalization to a multi-
legged robot with many shape variables. Second, the domain
wall has a natural interpretation as the jump in the shape
sequence problem. In practice, if we would like to have a small
number of jumpsK, it is equivalent to imposing total spin
symmetry number or magnetizationKto the model. Without
such symmetry, the original model in Eq. (11) lives in a Hilbert
space of size 2 M whereMis the number of shape variables.
The symmetry constraint helps to reduce the Hilbert space
complexity to Cr(M,K). We can also ignore the penalty term
λin this dual formulation within a fixed spin symmetric sector,
because the penalty will only contribute a constant shift to the
energy in the same sector. Therefore, the domain-wall search
algorithm can reach the optimal solution of the problem in
polynomial time whenKis finite. This approach provides
the foundation for designing optimal locomotion with physics-
informed gaits.
IV . ExperimentalSetup
To test our method, we employ a hexapod robot (which
we will refer to as the robophysical model) featuring two
rotational degrees of freedom in the body and one rotational
degree of freedom in each leg. The elongated body, measuring
26.5 cm in length, is segmented by bending joints that allow
for rotations of up to±5π/16 without causing self-collision.
Each segment is equipped with limbs on both sides, which
can be lifted and landed through control of the rotational
joint at the shoulder. All rotational joints are actuated by Dy-
namixel XL430-W250-T servo motors, and the body linkages
and appendages are 3D-printed from PLA. Experiments were
conducted on a flat, hard surface and were based on the as-
sumption of dry Coulomb kinetic friction. Servo motors were
directed using position commands executed by onboard PD
control. All gaits were tested with three repeated trials. Each
trial consisted of five complete gait cycles. Unless otherwise
noted, values are reported as mean±standard deviation (SD)
across the three repeated trials. Robot motion was captured
using a Vicon motion capture system, comprised of six Vero
optical motion capture cameras.
V . Results
We demonstrate the effectiveness of gaits generated by
our optimization framework through both simulation and
robophysical experiments (Sec. V-A), with particularly strong
performance at high speeds (Sec. V-B). The resulting gaits

--- PAGE 6 ---
Fig. 4.Comparison of hexapod forward locomotion.(Left) Time-lapse
snapshots of the robot executing the prescribed gaits. (Right) Corresponding
commanded leg–ground contact patterns. (a) Physics-informed asymmetric
gait exhibiting slow, long-duration counterclockwise whole-body yaw (from
t=0 to≈0.66T) followed by rapid, short-duration clockwise yaw, resulting
in net forward translation. Hind legs remain in contact throughout gait cycle.
(b) Alternative physics-informed gait in which the front-left and hind-left
legs remain in continuous contact throughout the cycle, yet still achieve
high forward performance. Similar long-duration counterclockwise and short-
duration clockwise whole-body yaw to (a). (c) Best bio-inspired gait based on
an alternating tripod contact pattern. (d) Best learned open-loop gait obtained
via reinforcement learning. (e) Best extended quadrupedal gait, in which the
third body segment follows the same kinematics as the first two segments
(effectively reducing the system to a quadruped). Corresponding toϕ α =π.
outperform reference baselines, including bio-inspired tripod
gaits (Sec. V-C), extended quadrupedal gaits (Sec. V-C), and
a PPO-trained reinforcement learning policy (Sec. V-D).
A. Physics-informed Gait
We use geometric mechanics and the Ising model domain-
wall search algorithm to identify new symmetries in hexapod
robots for forward locomotion. With six legs, the hexapod
has 64 different contact states; however, over half of these
states are unstable and cannot be achieved (e.g., no legs
in stance phase). For simplicity, we restrict the search to
stable contact patterns with at least four legs in stance (22
total contact patterns). We additionally include two three-leg
patterns corresponding to the alternating tripod contact states.
Thus, in total, we consider 24 contact states as the stable
contact space of the hexapod. We sample the shape space by
a circular prescription:α 1 =A α sin (τ), α2 =A α cos (τ), andτ
is uniformly sampled over a period.
We observe that the identified optimal gaits (following our
methods in Sec. III-E) are sensitive to our choice of amplitude
Aα. For a range ofA α, the optimization converges to two gaits,
corresponding to the optimization forA α <7π/18 rad and
Aα >7π/18 rad. We will refer to them as the physics-informed
low-amplitude gait and the physics-informed high-amplitude
gait. Note that the actual amplitude of the sinusoidal motion
is set to 5π/16 due to hardware limitations. However, because
the hardware-limit amplitude is near the boundary for physics-
informed low-amplitude and high-amplitude gaits, we test both
gaits. Snapshots of our robot implementing these gaits are
illustrated in Fig. 4(left). We also illustrate the contact map
in Fig. 4(right).
We observe that in both gaits, two legs on the hexapod
remain in full contact throughout a gait period. In the short-
amplitude gait, the hind limbs remain unchanged, and in
the large-amplitude gait, the front left and hind left limbs
remain in full contact (Fig. 4(a-b)). We tested our identified
gaits on a robophysical hexapod model and recorded speeds
greater than bio-inspired gaits. The small-amplitude (with both
hind limbs unactuated) produces a step length of 0.61±0.01
BL/cyc, whereas the large-amplitude gait (FL and HL limbs
unactuated) produces a step length of 0.56±0.03 BL/cyc.
Notably, because two of the legs are not actuated throughout
the locomotion, they can be replaced by non-actuated rigid
parts. To test this, we construct non-actuated limbs and observe
no change in forward displacement (Fig. I(c) and SI movie).
B. Impact of Frequency
During gait transitions in the physics-informed gaits, we
observe that there is a substantial amount of whole-body
pitch during locomotion (see SI movie). We quantify this by
measuring the whole-body pitch angle, which is defined as the
difference between the initial body vector and current body
vector projected onto the forward and vertical axes (a positive
pitch corresponds to the body vector pointing up). We posit
that this unstable pitch oscillation can be avoided when the
robot is operating at a higher frequency, and thus the physics-
informed gait should achieve better performance at high speed.
To test this hypothesis, we record the speed dependence
of the physics-informed small-amplitude gait (Fig. 5(a)). Ex-
perimental results reveal robot step length (BL/cyc) increases
linearly with gait frequency. Thus, there is a quadratic rela-
tionship between absolute speed and frequency (|v physics |=
0.559f+0.068f 2,R 2 =0.9920,p<0.05). Notably, data
above 1 Hz are excluded from quantitative analysis due to
the disparity between commanded and actual position caused
by motor limitations (see SI, Sec. S3).
Next, we analyze the effect of frequency on body pitch to
understand the increasing speed relationship for our physics-
informed gait. Comparing two trials at high and low gait
frequency, total-body pitch exhibits higher oscillations with
lower frequency (Fig. 5(c)). This relationship is attributed
to reduced static stability near unstable configurations. In
contrast, higher gait frequencies introduce dynamic stability

--- PAGE 7 ---
Fig. 5.Agile locomotion at high speed.(a) (a.1) Absolute speed and (a.2)
step length (displacement per gait cycle) for the bio-inspired and physics-
informed gaits as a function of gait frequency. Data above 1 Hz are excluded
from quantitative analysis due to motor limitations that cause substantial
deviation between commanded and executed position (see SI, Sec. S3); shown
as hollow markers. We excluded outliers from each data set with studentized
residuals>3. Because step length increases approximately linearly with
frequency, the absolute speed scales quadratically with frequency for both
gaits. Panels share identical x-axes. (b.1) Mean standard deviation of pitch
angle as a function of frequency for the physics-informed gait and (b.2) for the
bio-inspired gait. Panels share identical axes. (c) Experimental measurements
of whole-body pitch for the physics-informed gait at low and high frequencies
over two cycles. At low frequencies, the robot exhibits large pitch oscillations
due to loss of static stability near unstable configurations. At high frequencies,
dynamically acquired stability compensates for these perturbations, resulting
in substantially reduced pitch oscillations. (d) Illustration of the effect of gait
frequency on duty factor: as frequency increases, duty factor decreases, which
may partially account for the larger step length observed for the bio-inspired
gait at higher frequencies.
that reduces perturbations from unstable configurations (i.e.,
increasing frequency reduces the time spent falling in an
unstable configuration). Analysis of the average mean standard
deviation at increasing gait frequencies supports this idea
Fig. 5(b.1-2).
C. Baseline: bio-inspired gait
Inspired by insect locomotion, we prescribe the leg–ground
contact pattern using an alternating tripod gait, in which the
front-right (FR), middle-left (ML), and hind-right (HR) legs
form one tripod, while the front-left (FL), middle-right (MR),
and hind-left (HL) legs form the other. Each tripod config-
uration is statically stable. To avoid unstable configurations
during contact switching, we introduce an intermediate all-
contact phase in which all six legs remain in contact with the
ground. As a result, the overall duty factor (defined as the
average fraction of a gait cycle during which a leg remains
in contact with the ground) is 66.6%. Consistent with prior
studies, duty factor plays a critical role in determining the
locomotion performance of alternating-tripod gaits [16, 3]. The
prescribed contact function is illustrated in Fig. 6(b).
To simplify our analysis, we prescribe sinusoidal functions
to upper and lower body links,α 1 =A α sin(t) andα 2 =
Aα sin(t+ϕ α), respectively (Fig. 6(a)).A α is the joint angle
limit on the robot, andϕ α is the phase shift between the upper
and lower body joints (α 1 andα 2) (Fig. 6(b)). Additionally,
we defineϕ β as the phase difference between the upper body
joint and the contact sequence (Fig. 6(b)). Thus, we form a
parameter space spanned byϕ α andϕ β.
We test how these two parameters affect hexapod loco-
motion through robophysical experimentation and RFT-based
model predictions. The RFT-based model agrees well with
experimental results subject to a phase shift ofπ/8 onϕ β
(Fig. 6(c)). We attribute this phase shift to the finite time it
takes for contact switching in robophysical experiments. We
observe that the parameter set ofϕ α =11π/8 andϕ β =0
produces the highest step length of 0.48±0.01 BL/cyc, which
we will refer to as the best bio-inspired gait.
Additionally, whenϕ α =π, the hexapod gait is effectively
reduced to a quadruped gait (the conventional gait) because
the additional pair of legs only contributes to stability. We
refer to this gait as the extended quadrupedal gait (step length
of 0.41±0.01 BL/cyc).
Finally, we record the speed dependence of the best bio-
inspired gait (Fig. 5(a)). Similarly to the physics-informed gait,
the robot step length increases linearly with gait frequency.
The bio-inspired gait has a quadratic fit of|v bio|=0.362f+
0.177f 2,R 2 =0.9969,p<0.05. To explain the quadratic
relationship of speed and frequency in the bio-inspired gait,
we analyze the actual duty factor of the bio-inspired gait
illustrated in Fig. 5(d). Bio-inspired gaits are assigned a 66.6%
duty factor. As frequency increases, duty factor decreases
because of the finite time it takes to switch contact, which
we attribute as the mechanism for increased speed of the bio-
inspired gait. We observe increasing gait frequency has no
impact on the bio-inspired pitch standard deviation due to the
stable static gait configurations and imposed duty factor.
D. Comparison to Reinforcement Learning
For many applications requiring quadrupedal or bipedal
locomotion, reinforcement learning has become a promising
approach to design robust, agile gaits for these systems [23,
2, 20]; however, these approaches struggle to uncover new
or improved gaits for higher-dimensional systems, partially
because we lack a principled understanding of multi-legged
robot locomotion. To test this, we perform deep reinforcement
learning in Isaac Lab on our hexapod model to produce
an open-loop gait for forward locomotion. We train a PPO
policy for forward-velocity tracking. The action space is
continuous joint position commands: at timet, the policy
outputsa t ∈R 8, which specifies desired positions for the 8
actuated joints. The policy is conditioned on a continuous,

--- PAGE 8 ---
Fig. 6.Bio-inspired hexapod gait.(a) Sinusoidal prescriptions of (top) upper
body jointα 1, (middle) lower body jointα 2, and (bottom) alternating tripod
contact patternβ. Legs in stance and aerial phases are indicated by red and
open circles, respectively. (b) Definition of gait parameters:ϕ α, the phase shift
betweenα 1 andα 2; andϕ β, the phase shift betweenα 1 and the contact pattern
β. Legs are labeled by position: F (front), M (middle), H (hind), R (right),
and L (left). (c.1) Experimental measurements and (c.2) RFT-based model
predictions over the gait parameter space spanned by (ϕ α, ϕβ). Experimental
results exhibit an effective contact phase shift ofπ/8 relative to simulation,
attributed to finite leg touchdown time following contact commands.
singular forward-velocity commandv cmd
t ∈R(horizontal and
turning commands are set to 0), and the reward penalizes
tracking error between the measured forward velocityv x
t and
vcmd
t . The observation is restricted to an action history of
lengtho t = at−1;a t−2;. . .;a t−14
 ∈R 112, to produce an open-
loop gait pattern. The resulting reward curve is illustrated in
Fig. 7(a). We used standard reward functions from prior work
on learning locomotion [34] (see SI, Sec. S4 for learning
parameters).
To reduce the sim-to-real gap, we identify the motor dynam-
ics of the robophysical model qualitatively through comparison
of motor response curves (see SI, Sec. S4). Additionally, we
analyze the displacement of the learned gait through simula-
tion in Isaac Sim and on our robophysical model (Fig. 7(b)).
The displacement was fitted to 5 cycles of the learned gait
in the simulation, because the deployed gait frequency on
the robophysical model was slower than that of simulation.
The displacement results show a low sim-to-real gap of our
learned gait. Our open-loop reinforcement learning approach
achieves an experimentally tested step length of 0.38 BL/cyc,
underperforming both bio-inspired and physics-informed gaits
(Fig. 4(d)). The learned gait produces a gait pattern similar
to that of the extended quadrupedal gait, in which the front
and hind sets of limbs were used in a quadrupedal trotting
fashion while the middle pair provided stability (see SI movie).
Our analysis reveals an increased difficulty for reinforcement
Fig. 7.Open loop RL gait training and sim-to-real transfer .(a) Plot
of mean reward during open-loop reinforcement learning training. Training
was conducted over 9,800 steps with 4096 parallel environments per step.
(Illustrated) Hexapod model in Isaac Sim performing learned gait. (b)
Comparison of simulation and experiment displacement of learned RL gait.
The plot compares 5 cycles of the gait with fitted time scales. Real-world
deployment of RL gait consisted of gait cycles≈20% longer than simulation.
The results show low sim-to-real gap of the learned gait.
learning to take advantage of all pairs of legs.
VI. Discussion andConclusion
In this paper, we develop a framework to capture and apply
the additional symmetries available in many-legged systems
to provide agile forward locomotion. To do this, we design
a geometric mechanics model for multi-legged locomotion
and make carefully chosen simplifications to translate the
model into a graph optimization problem. Furthermore, we
provide an approach to use the duality of Ising and Potts
spin models to solve this optimization problem in polynomial
time and explore the complex gait space of a hexapod robot.
Results of our approach provide significant improvements
in forward translation for hexapod robots, verified through
simulation and robophysical experiments. Our work provides a
general approach for studying the locomotion of multi-legged
robots and motivates future integration of machine learning to
improve the optimization.
We note that although our physics-informed approach is
primarily aimed at deriving principled control strategies for
multi-legged robots, the same framework can also be used
to guide robot design. For example, it enables the systematic
design of novel morphologies, such as a hexapod robot in
which certain legs are replaced by non-actuated body parts.
Beyond solving the associated graph optimization problem,
our method provides a framework to reason about which ver-
tices in the graph can be added or removed without degrading
locomotion performance. In robotic terms, this framework
allows us to quantify how adding, removing, or relocating
legs affects overall locomotion, thereby enabling co-design of
morphology and control for highly redundant robotic systems.
We acknowledge several limitations of the present frame-
work. Our approach assumes that an environment model has
been established a priori; specifically, we consider (1) flat,
noise-free terrain and (2) full knowledge of the environment. In
many real-world deployment scenarios, such information may
be incomplete or unavailable. To address these limitations,
future work will extend the framework in two directions. First,
we will evaluate graph edges using experimentally measured
performance rather than numerically computed models. Sec-
ond, we will explicitly introduce uncertainty in contact switch-
ing and map this uncertainty to finite-temperature effects in

--- PAGE 9 ---
the corresponding Ising model, enabling principled reasoning
under environmental and actuation uncertainty.
Finally, our model provides physical insight into robo-
physical systems (simple robots designed to test fundamental
locomotion principles). An open question remains as to how
these physics-based principles can be scaled to more complex,
full-scale robotic platforms. We posit that physics-informed
gaits derived from our framework can serve as effective priors
or initialization seeds for learning-based controllers, such as
reinforcement learning. This strategy would enable robots to
adapt to environmental variability while retaining a physically
grounded structure. This hybrid approach offers a promising
pathway toward an advanced hexapod and, more broadly,
highly redundant robots that can outperform their few-legged
counterparts.
References
[1] R. McN. Alexander. The Gaits of Bipedal and
Quadrupedal Animals.The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 3(2):49–59, 1984. doi: 10.1177/
027836498400300205.
[2] Suyoung Choi, Gwanghyeon Ji, Jeongsoo Park,
Hyeongjun Kim, Juhyeok Mun, Jeong Hyun Lee, and
Jemin Hwangbo. Learning quadrupedal locomotion on
deformable terrain.Science Robotics, 8(74):eade2256,
2023.
[3] Baxi Chong, Yasemin O Aydin, Jennifer M Rieser, Guil-
laume Sartoretti, Tianyu Wang, Julian Whitman, Abdul
Kaba, Enes Aydin, Ciera McFarland, Kelimar Diaz Cruz,
et al. A general locomotion control framework for multi-
legged locomotors.Bioinspiration&Biomimetics, 17(4):
046015, 2022.
[4] Baxi Chong, Juntao He, Shengkai Li, Eva Erick-
son, Kelimar Diaz, Tianyu Wang, Daniel Soto, and
Daniel I Goldman. Self-propulsion via slipping: frictional
swimming in multi-legged locomotors.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.10604, 2022.
[5] Baxi Chong, Juntao He, Shengkai Li, Eva Erickson,
Kelimar Diaz, Tianyu Wang, Daniel Soto, and Daniel I
Goldman. Self-propulsion via slipping: Frictional swim-
ming in multilegged locomotors.Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 120(11):e2213698120,
2023.
[6] Joana Coelho, Fernando Ribeiro, Bruno Dias, Gil Lopes,
and Paulo Flores. Trends in the control of hexapod
robots: a survey.Robotics, 10(3):100, 2021.
[7] Ewen Dantec, Maximilien Naveau, Pierre Fernbach,
Nahuel Villa, Guilhem Saurel, Olivier Stasse, Michel
Taix, and Nicolas Mansard. Whole-body model predic-
tive control for biped locomotion on a torque-controlled
humanoid robot. In2022 IEEE-RAS 21st International
Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pages
638–644. IEEE, 2022.
[8] Sascha Freyberg and Helmut Hauser. The morphological
paradigm in robotics.Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science, 100:1–11, 2023.
[9] Robert J Full and Daniel E Koditschek. Templates and
anchors: neuromechanical hypotheses of legged locomo-
tion on land.Journal of experimental biology, 202(23):
3325–3332, 1999.
[10] Ruben Grandia, Fabian Jenelten, Shaohui Yang, Farbod
Farshidian, and Marco Hutter. Perceptive locomotion
through nonlinear model-predictive control.IEEE Trans-
actions on Robotics, 39(5):3402–3421, 2023.
[11] Qinghong Guo, Mrinal K Mandal, and Micheal Y Li. Ef-
ficient hodge–helmholtz decomposition of motion fields.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 26(4):493–501, 2005.
[12] Ross L Hatton and Howie Choset. Nonconservativity and
noncommutativity in locomotion.The European Physical
Journal Special Topics, 224(17-18):3141–3174, 2015.
[13] Juntao He, Baxi Chong, Zhaochen Xu, Sehoon Ha,
and Daniel I Goldman. Learning to enhance multi-
legged robot on rugged landscapes.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.09473, 2024.
[14] Milton Hildebrand. Symmetrical gaits of horses.Science,
150(3697):701–708, 1965.
[15] Milton Hildebrand. Symmetrical gaits of primates.Amer-
ican Journal of Physical Anthropology, 26(2):119–130,
1967.
[16] Milton Hildebrand. The quadrupedal gaits of vertebrates.
Bioscience, 39(11):766, 1989.
[17] Taesoo Kim, Minjun Choi, Seunguk Choi, Taeuan Yoon,
and Dongil Choi. Deep reinforcement learning control
of a hexapod robot. InActuators, volume 15, page 33.
MDPI, 2026.
[18] Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen,
Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning quadrupedal
locomotion over challenging terrain.Science robotics, 5
(47):eabc5986, 2020.
[19] Chen Li, Tingnan Zhang, and Daniel I Goldman. A
terradynamics of legged locomotion on granular media.
Science, 339(6126):1408–1412, 2013.
[20] Zhongyu Li, Xue Bin Peng, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey
Levine, Glen Berseth, and Koushil Sreenath. Rein-
forcement learning for versatile, dynamic, and robust
bipedal locomotion control.The International Journal
of Robotics Research, 44(5):840–888, 2025.
[21] Bo Lin, Baxi Chong, Yasemin Ozkan-Aydin, Enes Aydin,
Howie Choset, Daniel I Goldman, and Greg Blekherman.
Optimizing coordinate choice for locomotion systems
with toroidal shape spaces. In2020 IEEE/RSJ In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), pages 7501–7506, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
IROS45743.2020.9341476.
[22] Andrew Lucas. Ising formulations of many np problems.
Frontiers in physics, 2:5, 2014.
[23] Gabriel B Margolis, Ge Yang, Kartik Paigwar, Tao Chen,
and Pulkit Agrawal. Rapid locomotion via reinforcement
learning.The International Journal of Robotics Research,
43(4):572–587, 2024.
[24] Jerrold E Marsden and Tudor S Ratiu.Introduction to
mechanics and symmetry: a basic exposition of classical

--- PAGE 10 ---
mechanical systems, volume 17. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2013.
[25] Peter J Mayhew. Why are there so many insect species?
perspectives from fossils and phylogenies.Biological
Reviews, 82(3):425–454, 2007.
[26] LW McKeehan. A contribution to the theory of ferro-
magnetism.Physical Review, 26(2):274, 1925.
[27] Richard M Murray.A mathematical introduction to
robotic manipulation. CRC press, 2017.
[28] Renfrey Burnard Potts. Some generalized order-disorder
transformations. InMathematical proceedings of the
cambridge philosophical society, volume 48, pages 106–
109. Cambridge University Press, 1952.
[29] Edward M Purcell. Life at low reynolds number. In
Physics and our world: reissue of the proceedings of a
symposium in honor of Victor F Weisskopf, pages 47–67.
World Scientific, 2014.
[30] Tomson Qu, Dichen Li, Avideh Zakhor, Wenhao Yu, and
Tingnan Zhang. Versatile locomotion skills for hexapod
robots. In2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 6885–6892,
2024. doi: 10.1109/IROS58592.2024.10801714.
[31] Jennifer M Rieser, Chaohui Gong, Henry C Astley,
Perrin E Schiebel, Ross L Hatton, Howie Choset, and
Daniel I Goldman. Geometric phase and dimensionality
reduction in locomoting living systems.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.11374, 2019.
[32] Jennifer M Rieser, Jessica L Tingle, Daniel I Goldman,
Joseph R Mendelson, et al. Functional consequences of
convergently evolved microscopic skin features on snake
locomotion.Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 118(6), 2021.
[33] Jennifer M Rieser, Baxi Chong, Chaohui Gong, Henry C
Astley, Perrin E Schiebel, Kelimar Diaz, Christopher J
Pierce, Hang Lu, Ross L Hatton, Howie Choset, et al.
Geometric phase predicts locomotion performance in un-
dulating living systems across scales.Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 121(24):e2320517121,
2024.
[34] Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco
Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using massively
parallel deep reinforcement learning. InConference on
robot learning, pages 91–100. PMLR, 2022.
[35] Uluc Saranli, Martin Buehler, and Daniel E. Koditschek.
RHex: A Simple and Highly Mobile Hexapod Robot.
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 20(7):
616–631, 2001. doi: 10.1177/02783640122067570.
[36] Sarah S Sharpe, Stephan A Koehler, Robyn M Kuckuk,
Miguel Serrano, Patricio A Vela, Joseph Mendelson,
and Daniel I Goldman. Locomotor benefits of being a
slender and slick sand swimmer.Journal of Experimental
Biology, 218(3):440–450, 2015.
[37] Siddharth Shrivastava, Andras Karsai, Yasemin Ozkan
Aydin, Ross Pettinger, William Bluethmann, Robert O
Ambrose, and Daniel I Goldman. Material remodeling
and unconventional gaits facilitate locomotion of a robo-
physical rover over granular terrain.Science robotics, 5
(42):eaba3499, 2020.
[38] Tom Verstraten, Raphael Furn ´emont, Pablo Lopez-
Garcia, David Rodriguez-Cianca, Bram Vanderborght,
and Dirk Lefeber. Kinematically redundant actuators, a
solution for conflicting torque–speed requirements.The
International Journal of Robotics Research, 38(5):612–
629, 2019.
[39] Tingnan Zhang and Daniel I Goldman. The effectiveness
of resistive force theory in granular locomotion a.Physics
of Fluids, 26(10):101308, 2014.
