--- PAGE 1 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web
Application Development
Preprint
Hung Tran
hung@vals.ai
Vals AI
San Francisco, California, USA
Langston Nashold
langston@vals.ai
Vals AI
San Francisco, California, USA
Rayan Krishnan
rayan@vals.ai
Vals AI
San Francisco, California, USA
Antoine Bigeard
antoine.bigeard.cs@gmail.com
Vals AI
San Francisco, California, USA
Alex Gu
gua@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Abstract
Code generation has emerged as one of AI’s highest-impact use
cases, yet existing benchmarks measure isolated tasks rather than
the complete "zero-to-one" process of building a working applica-
tion from scratch. We introduceVibe Code Bench, a benchmark of
100 web application specifications (50 public validation, 50 held-out
test) with 964 browser-based workflows comprising 10,131 substeps,
evaluated against deployed applications by an autonomous browser
agent.
Across 16 frontier models, the best achieves 61.8% accuracy on
the test split, revealing that reliable end-to-end application develop-
ment remains a frontier challenge. We identify self-testing during
generation as a strong performance predictor (Pearson r=0.72), and
show through a completed human alignment study that evaluator
selection materially affects outcomes (31.8–93.6% pairwise step-
level agreement).
Our contributions include (1) a novel benchmark dataset and
browser-based evaluation pipeline for end-to-end web application
development, (2) a comprehensive evaluation of 16 frontier models
with cost, latency, and error analysis, and (3) an evaluator alignment
protocol with both cross-model and human annotation results.
We provide reproducibility artifacts, detailed in Appendix A.
CCS Concepts
•Computing methodologies → Natural language processing;
Neural networks;•Software and its engineering → Software
testing and debugging;Software development techniques.
Keywords
code generation, benchmarks, large language models, software en-
gineering, automated evaluation, agentic coding, web development
1 Introduction
Motivation.Building software is a high-leverage way to translate
ideas into economic value, but the ability to implement those ideas
remains concentrated among a small fraction of people. Meanwhile,
code generation has become a major use case for generative AI,
and developer-facing tools are seeing rapid adoption in day-to-day
workflows [16, 18]. Existing benchmarks suggest that models are
increasingly capable on constrained tasks (e.g., function synthesis
and issue resolution) [2, 3, 6, 7].
However, the most consequential promise of “vibe coding” is
not faster completion of isolated edits; it is enabling non-technical
users to build complete applications end-to-end from natural lan-
guage intent. If reliable, this capability could expand who can create
software and compress the time from specification to a working
prototype.
The gap.Despite extensive work on code generation evaluation,
there is no widely used benchmark that measures whether models
can produce a complete, deployable web application from a natural
language specification—a “zero-to-one” setting that includes multi-
file code, configuration, deployment, and user-facing workflows.
Overview of Vibe Code Bench.We introduceVibe Code Bench
(VCB), the first benchmark to test LLMs’ ability to generate a
complete working web application from only a text specification. It
contains 100 realistic application specifications split into apublic
validation set(50 tasks) and atest set(50 tasks). Across both
splits, tasks are paired with 964 automated browser workflows
(10,131 substeps). Each task asks a model to build an application
from scratch in a sandboxed environment, with access to a browser,
a terminal, and common production services (e.g., authentication,
databases, payments, and email). Applications are evaluated by an
autonomous browser agent that executes end-to-end workflows
and scores success based on substep completion.
Key findings.Across 16 frontier models, we find that end-to-end
application development remains unreliable: the top model (GPT-
5.3-Codex) passes 61.8% of workflows. We also observe a strong
association between a model’s self-testing behavior (browser usage
during development) and its final performance. Our alignment
study shows that evaluator choice matters: some evaluator pairs
align strongly, whereas others diverge substantially.
Contributions.Our contributions include the following:
(1) A novel benchmark datasetof 100 natural-language web
application specifications split into a public validation set
and a test set, with 964 browser-based workflows spanning
diverse domains and difficulty levels.
arXiv:2603.04601v1  [cs.SE]  4 Mar 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
Figure 1: Generation flow from natural-language specification to a runnable application artifact.
(2) A realistic generation harness(based on open-source
OpenHands fork [21]) that supports multi-hour develop-
ment sessions with browser and terminal access in a con-
tainerized environment.
(3) An automated evaluation pipelineusing browser agents
to test end-to-end workflows and produce fine-grained pass-
fail signals.
(4) A comprehensive evaluationof 16 frontier models across
providers, including cost/latency tradeoffs and error analy-
ses. Performance on the Vibe Code Bench is far more dis-
criminative than on existing benchmarks like SWE-Bench:
the gap between MiniMax M2.5 and Claude Opus 4.6 is 2.8%
on SWE-Bench [20] but 42.7% on Vibe Code Bench.
(5) An evaluator-alignment protocol and analysis, includ-
ing completed cross-evaluator robustness experiments and
an external three-annotator human-alignment study.
Table 1: Top-model accuracy on Vibe Code Bench (test split).
Model Accuracy±SE (%)
GPT-5.3-Codex61.77±4.71
Claude Opus 4.657.57±4.37
GPT-5.253.50±5.07
Claude Opus 4.6 Thinking53.50±4.68
Claude Sonnet 4.651.48±4.64
GPT-5.2-Codex37.91±4.58
2 Related Work
We situate Vibe Code Bench within the broader landscape of code
generation benchmarks, web agent evaluation, and agentic coding
systems.
Code Generation Benchmarks.Existing benchmarks span the
spectrum from function-level to repository-level tasks, but none
evaluate the full “zero-to-one” application development process.
HumanEval [3] and MBPP [2] evaluate function-level code genera-
tion from docstrings, testing isolated algorithmic reasoning. SWE-
Bench [7] and its variants (SWE-Bench Verified [14], SWE-Bench
Pro [5]) test models’ ability to resolve real GitHub issues within ex-
isting codebases, requiring an understanding of complex codebases
but assuming substantial existing infrastructure. SWE-Lancer [12]
evaluates models on $1M worth of real freelance tasks from Upwork,
providing economic grounding but still focusing on scoped modi-
fications rather than greenfield development. LiveCodeBench [6]
provides continuously updated competitive programming problems
to avoid contamination.
Table 2 summarizes key differences between existing bench-
marks and Vibe Code Bench. The critical gap VCB addresses is the
zero-to-onecapability: building complete, deployable applications
from natural language specifications rather than modifying existing
code or solving isolated problems.
Web Agent Benchmarks.WebArena [ 24] and VisualWebArena [8]
evaluate agents on web navigation and interaction tasks, achieving
up to 60% success rates on complex multi-step workflows. These
benchmarks test the ability touseexisting web applications but not
tobuildthem. Our evaluation pipeline leverages similar browser
automation techniques but applies them to test AI-generated appli-
cations rather than human-built ones.
Agentic Coding Systems.Academic work has developed open-
source frameworks for extended coding sessions. OpenHands [21]
provides a platform for AI software developers with browser and
terminal access. SWE-agent [23] introduces agent-computer inter-
faces for automated software engineering, with mini-swe-agent

--- PAGE 3 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
Table 2: Comparison of code-generation benchmarks.
Benchmark Task Type Eval Method Gaps
HumanEval Single func-
tion
Unit tests No multi-file apps or
deployment
SWE-Bench Bug fixes Unit Tests Assumes existing
codebase
SWE-Lancer Freelancing E2E tests Scoped tasks, not full
apps
LiveCodeBench Leetcode Unit tests No real-world context
Terminal-Bench Terminal
Tasks
Unit Tests No browser UI or per-
sistence
WebArena Web naviga-
tion
Task Success Navigation only, no
code gen
VCB Full app Browser
agent
—
offering a simplified 100-line variant. Agentless [22] takes a sim-
pler approach without persistent agent state. Terminal-Bench [10]
evaluates agents on realistic command-line tasks.
Commercial systems—Claude Code [ 1], Cursor [4], Codex [15],
Replit Agent [17], and Lovable [9]—demonstrate that multi-hour de-
velopment sessions are feasible in production. However, systematic
evaluation of end-to-end application development capabilities has
been limited. Vibe Code Bench provides a standardized framework
for such evaluation.
3 Benchmark Design
Our benchmark design optimizes for three goals: (1)realism(tasks
resemble what non-technical users ask for), (2)reproducibility
(standardized environment and run manifests), and (3)implementation-
agnostic evaluation(apps are judged by user-visible behavior
rather than specific implementation).
3.1 Data Construction
Our benchmark consists of 100 application specifications designed
to represent real-world software development scenarios, split into
apublic validation set(50 tasks) and atest set(50 tasks). The
two splits are disjoint. Specifications span three domain categories:
• Individual(24 apps): An app a user would vibe-code for
their personal use. These most often do not have authenti-
cation. Example: an app to keep track of your habits.
• Solo Founder(45 apps): An app someone starting a busi-
ness might build themselves. These often have simple email-
based authentication, though some require more complex
authentication. Example: an app to find and reserve parking
in crowded areas.
• Enterprise Tool(31 apps): A program that a business may
build internally rather than acquire from a vendor. These
often include multiple roles or a role hierarchy. Example:
an app to track and approve procurement requests.
The following process was used to generate the task specifica-
tions and UI workflows:
(1) Idea generation: Candidate tasks were inspired by con-
sumer apps, YC startup ideas, consulting case studies, and
common internal enterprise needs.
(2) Specification writing: Each idea was synthetically ex-
panded into a short natural language specification describ-
ing core functionality, authorization model, and any re-
quired features.
(3) Workflow construction: Each specification was paired
with 6–23 synthetically-generated automated workflow
tests covering core functionality, edge cases, and critical
user workflows.
(4) Expert Refinement: Professional product managers and
software engineers validated that specifications and work-
flows were clear, executable, and representative of real de-
velopment work, making any modifications as needed.
(5) Final Review: Two senior-level project managers manually
went through the edited specifications and workflows a
second time, particularly looking for missing information
from specifications, violations of workflow independence,
or ambiguity in specifications.
Task Format and Test Structure.Each application includes meta-
data (domain, difficulty, required services) and a natural-language
specification shown to the models. The specification was designed
to be concise and written from a non-technical perspective, to
mimic the usage of a real vibe-coder.
The specifications are designed to contain all of the information
needed to pass the tests - we deliberately avoid situations in which a
feature is mentioned in the tests but not in the spec. However, specs
are also deliberately minimal: they containno moreinformation
than necessary, to mimic real user input. See Appendix F for an
example specification.
Third-Party Service Integration.Across the benchmark, 28% (28/100)
of applications require integration with at least one external service
(Stripe and/or email):
• Email only(9 apps): User notifications, verification emails,
reports
• Stripe only(6 apps): Payment processing, subscriptions,
invoicing
• Both email + Stripe(13 apps): Workflows requiring cross-
service consistency
These integrations are intentionally included for two reasons.
First, they increase task difficulty in ways not captured by pure
CRUD apps (e.g., async webhooks, delivery verification, and multi-
service state consistency). Second, they better approximate real
production requirements where payments and notifications are
common. All services run in sandbox/test mode as isolated contain-
ers inside the generation environment.
Tests.Applications are paired with UI workflows. The goal of
these workflows is to evaluate performance as a real user would,
clicking through the web application end-to-end in the browser.
• Task: A task is a synonym for a single specification. An
applicationis a single runnable implementation generated
by the agent to solve a task.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
• Workflow: Each task has between 6 and 23 workflows (or
tests), designed to evaluate specific aspects of functional-
ity. For example, a workflow for a social media platform
involves creating an account, creating a new post, com-
menting on the post, and then signing out. Each workflow
includes a brief purpose statement and a set of substeps.
• Substep: The individual steps the evaluator must take for
each workflow are referred to as substeps. Examples include
"Create an account with the email X" or "Navigate to Page
Y and click Button Z".
These definitions are used by a browser-based agent to test the
application (see Section 3.3). We chose a browser agent because it
is implementation-agnostic: it avoids brittle DOM-coupled checks
(e.g., fixed selectors) and does not require internal code instrumen-
tation, in contrast to methods such as unit tests or programmatic
end-to-end tests like Playwright. Models are free to choose UI
structure and styling as long as user-visible behavior satisfies the
specification. Appendix G provides an example set of workflow
definitions.
Table 3: Dataset splits and evaluation workload.
Split #Tasks #Workflows #Substeps
Validation (public) 50 491 4,995
Test 50 473 5,136
Total 100 964 10,131
3.2 Generation Harness
Models operate within a fully-featured development environment
based on a modified version of OpenHands [21], an agentic scaf-
fold for programming tasks. We chose OpenHands for its robust
containerization architecture, browser integration, extensible tool
system, and wide adoption in the community.
Environment Components.
• Isolated containers: Each model receives an isolated con-
tainer with complete control over the development workspace.
• Terminal access: Unrestricted access to install dependen-
cies, run builds, start servers, and execute arbitrary com-
mands.
• Browser capabilities: Web browsing for documentation
lookup and self-testing generated applications.
• Service integrations: We provide Supabase, MailHog, and
Stripe endpoints to the agent. The harness exposes connec-
tivity and credentials, but the model must discover and use
these services correctly in its generated app and workflows.
We use Supabase as the default backend substrate because it inte-
grates cleanly with agent tooling while remaining straightforward
to self-host reproducibly [ 19]. It unifies PostgreSQL, authentica-
tion, and object storage behind a single local stack, reducing setup
variance across tasks.
MailHog and Stripe.We include MailHog and Stripe in the spec-
ifications and harness because many product workflows require
outbound email and payment operations. Excluding these systems
would overestimate real-world readiness by removing failure modes
around external service wiring, retries, and state synchronization.
A vailable Tools.Agents have access to core OpenHands tools for
terminal commands, file editing, web navigation, and task submis-
sion. The harness is able to access the full set of tools exposed by the
Supabase and Tavily MCPs (Tavily is integrated with OpenHands
by default). See Appendix C for the full set of tools.
Normalization.We normalize generation effort by giving every
model the same wall-clock budget: up to5 hoursper application.
Any work completed within this window counts toward the fi-
nal artifact; work after the timeout is not included. We use this
time-based normalization because it mirrors real-world develop-
ment constraints and it allows for the evaluation of a diverse set of
harnesses, even those without instrumentation for counting turns.
System Prompt Design.We developed a detailed system prompt
through iterative testing, addressing common failure modes: man-
dating a consistent tech stack (React + Vite frontend, Tailwind CSS,
Supabase backend), adding explicit instructions to test deployment
before submission, and providing detailed guidance on environment
variable handling and Docker networking.
It was necessary to mandate a tech stack; otherwise, generated
apps were too heterogeneous to evaluate consistently at scale. We
also mandate Docker Compose so each submission is portable and
can be started by the evaluator using a deterministic entry point.
Docker-in-Docker.Docker-in-Docker is required because agents
must build and run app-specific Compose stacks (frontend, back-
end, and auxiliary services) inside isolated per-task workspaces.
The outer container is the model sandbox; inner containers are
application services launched by the agent. This design provides
strong task isolation, reproducible startup behavior for evaluation,
and portable artifacts that can be replayed later.
3.3 Automated Evaluation Pipeline
Our evaluation pipeline uses Browser Use [13], an autonomous web
agent, to perform point-and-click testing of generated applications.
See Section 3.1 for test-definition structure.
Why browser-agent evaluation.We evaluate through user-visible
browser interactions rather than DOM-specific assertions or in-
ternal unit tests. This keeps evaluation implementation-agnostic
across heterogeneous apps and better reflects whether real users
can complete required workflows.
Pipeline Inputs and Runtime.Each evaluation takes two inputs:
(1) the generated application bundle (including Docker Compose
and environment wiring) and (2) workflow definitions written as
natural-language step sequences. Evaluation is fully automated and
run in isolated environments so different apps cannot interfere with
each other.
Evaluator Configuration.For each workflow, we launch a fresh
headless browser session (1920 ×1200) and run the Browser Use
agent with vision enabled. We use Claude Sonnet 4.5 as the canon-
ical evaluator for this benchmark; Section 6 reports completed
cross-evaluator validation and external human-alignment results
for this setup (Table 10). Each workflow evaluation is capped at

--- PAGE 5 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
Figure 2: Automated evaluation flow from deployed app to workflow pass/fail scoring.
100 agent steps to bound evaluation cost/runtime while still allow-
ing multi-page workflows; timeout and watchdog limits are fixed
globally (Appendix D).
Evaluation Workflow.
(1) Deployment verification: Starts the application stack
via Docker Compose and verifies that the app becomes
reachable.
(2) Workflow execution: In a fresh browser session, the eval-
uator performs user actions and checks expected outcomes
for each substep, producing structured substep-level pass-
fail judgments.
(3) Workflow scoring: Using these LLM-as-judge substep
judgments, a workflow passes when ≥90% of substeps suc-
ceed.
(4) Application aggregation: Application accuracy is the per-
centage of workflows that pass.
Failure Semantics.If an app fails the deployment verification,
all workflows for that app are marked as failed. If a workflow
run does not return structured evaluation output (e.g., due to a
timeout/termination), the workflow is marked as failed.
Isolation.Isolation between workflows is enforced at two levels:
(i) app-level runtime isolation and (ii) fresh browser session plus
unique account/data values per workflow to prevent state leakage.
We also validated workflow definitions to avoid cross-workflow
dependencies.
3.4 Metrics
For each application (or task), we report:
• Accuracy: Percentage of workflows passing. A workflow
is passing if at least 90% of its substeps succeed.
• Cost: Total model API cost for generation. Pricing is based
on the native provider for all models, with no discount.
Caching is accounted for.
• Latency: Total wall-clock time for generation, from the
first turn to submission.
Overall benchmark metrics are computed as the mean of per-
application results on the test split. For model𝑚 with per-application
accuracies{𝑎 𝑚,𝑖 }𝑛
𝑖=1, we report
¯𝑎𝑚 ±SE 𝑚,SE 𝑚 = 𝑠𝑚√𝑛 ,
where 𝑠𝑚 is the sample standard deviation across applications (𝑛=
50), following standard uncertainty reporting practice [11].
We use a 90% substep accuracy threshold to tolerate minor non-
critical errors while still requiring near-complete workflow cor-
rectness. Evaluating at the workflow level (rather than pooling
successful substeps across workflows) mitigates cross-workflow
masking: a workflow with a broken core step does not receive credit
from unrelated successful substeps in other workflows.
4 Experiments and Results
We evaluate 16 models from 9 providers: OpenAI (GPT-5.3-Codex,
GPT-5.2, GPT-5.2-Codex, GPT-5 Mini), Anthropic (Claude Opus
4.6, Claude Opus 4.6 Thinking, Claude Sonnet 4.6, Claude Haiku
4.5 Thinking), Google (Gemini 3.1 Pro, Gemini 3 Flash), Alibaba
(Qwen3.5 Plus Thinking), xAI (Grok 4.1 Fast Reasoning), Kimi
(Kimi-K2.5 Thinking), MiniMax (MiniMax M2.5), zAI (GLM-5), and
DeepSeek (DeepSeek V3.2 Thinking). These models were chosen
as a representative sample of top-performing open-weight and
closed-weight offerings.
All models use vision if supported, the highest reasoning level
available for that model, and the default temperature specified by
the model provider.
4.1 Overall Benchmark Performance
Table 4 presents the test-set results across the 16 models. GPT-
5.3-Codex takes the #1 spot, and Anthropic and OpenAI models
dominate the top of the rankings.
Gemini 3.1 Pro also performs well, although clearly below Opus
4.6 and Codex. Open-weight models such as GLM 5, Qwen 3.5, and
Kimi K2.5 hover around 15% to 24%, performing worse than leading
closed-weight counterparts.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
Figure 3: Accuracy–cost and accuracy–latency trade-offs.
Table 4: Model performance on Vibe Code Bench (test
split). Open-weight models are marked ✓; closed models
are marked×.
Model Accuracy Cost Latency Open
GPT-5.3-Codex61.77±4.71% $11.91 75.8m×
Claude Opus 4.657.57±4.37% $8.69 21.3m×
GPT-5.253.50±5.07% $17.75 82.9m×
Claude Opus 4.6 Thinking53.50±4.68% $8.28 23.1m×
Claude Sonnet 4.651.48±4.64% $5.91 26.2m×
GPT-5.2-Codex37.91±4.58% $4.15 32.2m×
Gemini 3.1 Pro32.03±4.34% $3.83 20.2m×
GLM-523.36±4.03% $40.27 224.3m✓
Gemini 3 Flash20.20±3.95% $0.94 13.4m×
Kimi-K2.5 Thinking17.54±3.26% $0.88 42.8m✓
Qwen3.5 Plus Thinking15.74±3.18% $3.80 50.3m✓
MiniMax M2.514.85±2.95% $2.20 51.1m✓
GPT-5 Mini14.17±3.54% $0.25 11.6m×
Claude Haiku 4.5 Thinking11.39±3.13% $1.31 12.9m×
DeepSeek V3.2 Thinking5.11±2.13% $2.47 56.1m✓
Grok 4.1 Fast Reasoning1.20±1.20% $0.21 8.8m×
4.2 Cost and Latency
Figure 3 visualizes accuracy–cost and accuracy–latency trade-offs.
Higher cost and longer runtime are associated with higher accuracy,
but with important exceptions. For example, Claude Opus 4.6 attains
near-top accuracy at lower cost and latency than GPT-5.3-Codex.
On both plots, GLM-5 is a clear outlier because of its extremely
long trajectories, which cause both high cost and high latency.
Overall, both frontiers show diminishing returns: additional time
and money improve performance, but the gains taper off.
4.3 Difficulty, Integrations, and Domains
Difficulty.Test applications are grouped into Easy/Medium/Hard
tiers. We compute the per-application mean pass rate across all 16
evaluated models. Performance declines sharply from easy to hard
applications, with hard-tier tasks contributing disproportionately
Table 5: Accuracy by difficulty (%).
Difficulty # GPT-5.3-Codex Opus 4.6 Gemini 3.1 Pro Avg. Model
Easy 23 81.88 73.20 46.24 44.29
Medium 19 57.91 54.11 28.33 21.36
Hard 8 13.13 20.86 0.00 6.03
to near-zero app pass rates across the rankings. Models also obtain
a relatively large share of total points from easy-tier applications.
Table 6: Accuracy by integration (%).
Integration # GPT-5.3-Codex Opus 4.6 Gemini 3.1 Pro Avg. Model
None 37 71.25 63.58 38.42 34.18
Email only 4 55.00 46.25 32.50 23.20
Stripe only 2 12.50 25.00 12.50 10.55
Both 7 29.58 41.59 3.57 13.49
Integrations.External integrations substantially increase bench-
mark difficulty. On the test split, GPT-5.3-Codex drops from 71.25%
on no-integration apps to 29.58% on apps requiring both email and
Stripe; the all-model average drops from 34.18% to 13.49%. Inte-
grating with Stripe is generally harder than integrating with email.
Sample sizes for "Stripe Only" are small so should be interpreted
directionally.
Table 7: Accuracy by domain (%).
Domain # GPT-5.3-Codex Opus 4.6 Gemini 3.1 Pro Avg. Model
Individual 12 76.93 56.59 49.30 43.01
Solo Founder 21 60.71 61.81 37.89 30.17
Enterprise Tool 17 52.36 53.04 12.62 19.01
Domains.Domains follow the same directional trend as difficulty.
At the aggregate level, performance decreases from Individual to
Solo Founder to Enterprise Tool (about 10 percentage points per
step). Some models deviate from this pattern; for example, Opus
4.6 performs best on Solo Founder.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
Figure 4: Application pass-rate histograms for six representative models (ranks 1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16).
5 Analysis
5.1 Tool Use and Model Behavior
The tools in Table 8 correspond toexecute_bash, str_replace_editor,
browser, execute_sql, and apply_migration. Percentages are
row-normalized to 100%.
Table 8: Tool invocations by model (% of calls per app).
Model Acc. (%) Bash Edit Browser SQL Migrate Other
GPT-5.3-Codex 61.8 61.4 10.2 13.2 3.9 2.1 9.1
GPT-5.2 53.5 48.5 32.7 13.6 1.4 1.3 2.6
Claude Sonnet 4.6 51.5 23.9 32.7 26.1 3.7 7.1 6.6
Gemini 3.1 Pro 32.0 56.9 18.6 17.6 1.2 2.8 3.0
Gemini 3 Flash 20.2 54.8 28.3 10.8 2.1 1.8 2.2
Grok 4.1 Fast Reasoning 1.2 41.8 27.9 1.1 14.4 7.0 7.9
First, despite us providing 22 tools to the models, they spend
about 95% of their tool calls on only five: running bash commands,
editing files, browsing the app, executing SQL, and applying migra-
tions. Among the Supabase tools, the models generally preferred
executing raw SQL rather than using migration helpers. The Tavily
search and web retrieval tools were also underutilized - only 18.8%
of models used Tavily at all.
We find that self-testing is positively correlated with success.
Across the 16 evaluated models, browser tool calls per applica-
tion show a positive correlation with accuracy (Pearson 𝑟= 0.72).
This trend persists after controlling for generation latency (partial
𝑟= 0.72), indicating an association between self-testing and better
outcomes beyond simply spending more time.
In contrast, editing volume is not predictive. Edit-call volume has
a very weak correlation with accuracy (Pearson𝑟= 0.09), indicating
thathowedits are used is more important than edit count.
Figure 5 shows single-run trajectories for eight models on the
same test-set application (bill_splitting_app), using a common
elapsed-time axis. Top-performing models generally sustain longer
runs and cycle between exploration, coding, execution, and browser-
based checking for much longer horizons.
Lower-performing models often terminate earlier and exhibit
narrower action-phase coverage. This supports the tool-use find-
ing above: sustained self-testing and iterative repair correlate with
stronger end-to-end outcomes. Lower-performing models also spend
less time testing, as evidenced by short browsing phases. Full per-
model trajectory artifacts are provided in Appendix A.
5.2 Error Analysis
Failures.Among the top five models (by accuracy), 12.8% of
applications scored zero points. For models in the bottom five, this
was significantly higher at 73.2%. The worst five models also had a
substantial percentage of apps fail to start entirely (14.0%), which
did not occur for top models. Applications that scored 100% were
rare, occurring in only 8.8% of applications produced by the top
five models.
Histograms.Figure 4 shows similar distributional trends. Model
improvement is driven primarily byreducing the number of apps
that score zero, rather than incremental improvements across all
apps. The distributions are often strongly bimodal, especially for
top models. Using 12.5-point bins, the most common buckets for
GPT-5.3-Codex are 0–12.5% and 87.5–100%.
Error Modes.Looking at failed workflows for apps that started
successfully, we further classify behavioral failures across all models
using a six-category taxonomy.
(1) Authorization Issue(20.4%) - Sign-up or login was non-
functional, user could not obtain the correct role, etc.
(2) Missing Feature(46.7%) - The application did not implement
a feature specified in the specification.
(3) Validation or Policy Block(14.8%) - The agent is prevented
from performing actions that should be allowed. The most

--- PAGE 8 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
Figure 5: Trajectory timeline by model on a single application (bill_splitting_app).
common variant is misconfigured Row-Level Security poli-
cies.
(4) UI Rendering or Navigation(6.0%) - Something was not ren-
dered or missing in the UI, or the agent could not navigate
between pages as needed.
(5) Data Consistency and Backend Logic(1.9%) - The application
writes incorrect data to the database or the backend does
not handle an operation correctly.
(6)Other(10.2%) - Any failure not in the above categories.
This breakdown indicates that most failures are capability gaps in
implemented product surfaces rather than startup failures. Certain
models more commonly have specific error types than others. For
example, Grok 4.1 Fast Reasoning and GPT-5.2-Codex have elevated
authorization issues (32.3% and 30.3% of their behavioral failures),
while Gemini 3.1 Pro has the highest missing-feature share (58.5%).
5.3 Variance Analysis
To understand the stability of leaderboard rankings, we decompose
variability into two components: generation-side and evaluator-side
variance.
Generation variance.We fixed six specifications and three source
models (Gemini 3.1 Pro, GPT-5.2, Claude Sonnet 4.6). For each
source model and app, we generated five independent runs (90
generations total) and evaluated each generated app once. This
isolates how much accuracy changes when the model generates
different apps from the same prompt.
Evaluator variance.On the same panel, we froze generated apps
and reran evaluation five times per app using Claude Sonnet 4.5 as
evaluator (90 evaluations total). This isolates score variation caused
by evaluator stochasticity on identical artifacts.
Table 9: Generation and evaluator accuracy on the six-app
variance panel (mean±stderr).
Source model Generation Acc. (%) Evaluator Acc. (%)
Gemini 3.1 Pro19.38±3.47 37.61±0.99
GPT-5.251.63±3.95 51.25±1.16
Claude Sonnet 4.647.65±5.00 45.71±3.00
Takeaways.Variance analysis increases confidence in the main
findings: evaluator reruns are consistent on fixed apps, and generation-
side variability is bounded relative to the large cross-model gaps
observed in VCB. The generation/evaluator standard errors are
3.47/0.99 (Gemini 3.1 Pro), 3.95/1.16 (GPT-5.2), and 5.00/3.00 (Claude
Sonnet 4.6) percentage points. Variance decomposition shows most
observed variance comes from generation rather than rescoring
(generation share: 92.5% Gemini 3.1 Pro, 92.1% GPT-5.2, 73.5% Claude
Sonnet 4.6). Therefore, benchmark conclusions are robust for major
ranking patterns, while only near-tie model differences require
caution.
6 Human Alignment
A critical question for automated evaluation is whether model-
based evaluators align with human judgment. To assess this, we
compute human-model, human-human, and model-model align-
ment.
6.1 Methodology
Applications.We select six tasks to cover a wide variety of do-
mains, difficulties, and integrations. For each task, we generate
three applications using three distinct source models (Gemini 3.1
Pro, GPT-5.2, Claude Sonnet 4.6). This yields 18 applications total
and 1,401 unique substeps to be evaluated.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
Table 10: Pairwise step-level agreement (%) across model and human evaluators.
Evaluator Gemini 3.1 Pro GPT-5.2 Claude Sonnet 4.6 Claude Sonnet 4.5 Reviewer A Reviewer B Reviewer C Mean Reviewer
Gemini 3.1 Pro – 38.8 86.4 86.5 86.4 84.5 83.7 84.7
GPT-5.2 38.8 – 33.1 36.0 48.0 33.5 31.8 36.1
Claude Sonnet 4.6 86.4 33.1 –87.886.0 86.7 86.0 86.3
Claude Sonnet 4.5 86.5 36.087.8– 87.5 86.0 86.286.4
Reviewer A 86.4 48.0 86.0 87.5 –93.688.6 –
Reviewer B 84.5 33.5 86.7 86.093.6–91.4–
Reviewer C 83.7 31.8 86.0 86.2 88.691.4– –
Human Evaluators.Each of the eighteen apps was evaluated
by two human evaluators (out of a pool of three). They opened
the application in the browser, and were instructed to manually
test by performing each substep. They only tested the user-facing
application and did not have access to internal code, unit tests, or
the browser console. Each substep was marked as a pass or a fail
by the expert. An expert reviews all three model generations for a
given task.
Model Evaluators.We ran one evaluation pass per application
using four evaluator models (i.e., models controlling the browser-
use agent): Gemini 3.1 Pro, GPT-5.2, Claude Sonnet 4.6, and Claude
Sonnet 4.5.
Alignment Metric.We measuresubstep alignment. Between two
evaluators, we consider a given evaluation substep aligned if the
scores match (both pass or both fail). The overall alignment is
the percentage of aligned substeps. All reported alignments are
pairwise between two evaluators.
6.2 Results
Pairwise agreement matrix.We compute pairwise substep align-
ment between all evaluator pairs (four model evaluators and three
human reviewers), using only shared labeled substeps for each pair.
Table 10 reports this as a symmetric 2-D matrix, along with the
mean alignment between each model and all human reviewers.
Human-human alignment.Human-human agreement remains
high (88.6–93.6%), indicating relatively consistent manual judg-
ments across reviewers. This suggests human labels are stable
enough to serve as an external reference for evaluator quality.
Model-model alignment.Model-model agreement is heteroge-
neous: Claude Sonnet 4.6 and Claude Sonnet 4.5 align strongly
(87.8%), Gemini 3.1 Pro is close to both Claude Sonnet evaluators
(86.4–86.5%), while GPT-5.2 remains low against the other evalu-
ators (33.1–38.8%). This indicates evaluator outputs are not inter-
changeable, and evaluator selection can materially change reported
outcomes.
Model-human alignment.Model-human agreement also varies
substantially. The final-column pooled means are 86.4% (Claude
Sonnet 4.5), 86.3% (Claude Sonnet 4.6), 84.7% (Gemini 3.1 Pro), and
36.1% (GPT-5.2). In this panel, Claude Sonnet 4.5 is the strongest
evaluator in terms of human alignment, with Claude Sonnet 4.6
and Gemini 3.1 Pro close behind.
Takeaway.These results indicate that evaluator choice materially
affects alignment outcomes. In this panel, Claude Sonnet 4.5, Claude
Sonnet 4.6, and Gemini 3.1 Pro are substantially more consistent
with human judgment than GPT-5.2. Both Claude Sonnet 4.5 and
Claude Sonnet 4.6 are overall well-aligned with human graders and
are accurate evaluator models.
7 Limitations
We identify three important limitations:
(1) Design and code quality not measured: Passing func-
tional tests does not imply maintainable, secure, or well-
documented code. We did not evaluate code readability,
visual design quality, or security vulnerabilities.
(2) Single technology stack: Our benchmark focuses exclu-
sively on React/Vite web applications with Supabase back-
end. Results may not generalize to other frameworks or
backend technologies.
(3) Web applications only: We evaluate only browser-based
applications. The “zero-to-one” capability for other soft-
ware types—command-line tools, desktop applications, mo-
bile apps—remains unexplored.
8 Conclusion
We introduced Vibe Code Bench, a benchmark of 100 web applica-
tion specifications evaluated through 964 browser-based workflows.
Across 16 frontier models, the best reaches 61.8% accuracy—showing
that reliable end-to-end application development remains unsolved.
Two findings stand out: model improvement is driven primarily by
reducing complete failures rather than incremental gains, and self-
testing during generation strongly predicts performance (r=0.72).
Our human alignment study shows that automated evaluation is
reliable when the right evaluator is used, making evaluator choice
a first-class reporting concern.
The question is no longer whether AI can write code, but whether
it can build software. Vibe Code Bench tracks progress toward that
bar.
Acknowledgments
We thank Mike Merrill and John Yang for sharing lessons from
Terminal-Bench and SWE-Bench, and the OpenHands team for
their foundational work. We also thank the professional engineers
and product managers who validated our specifications and tests.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
References
[1] Anthropic. Claude code. https://claude.com/product/claude-code, 2024. Accessed:
2026-03-03.
[2] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk
Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le,
et al. Program synthesis with large language models.arXiv preprint, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
[3] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde
de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code.arXiv
preprint, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
[4] Cursor. Cursor: The AI-first code editor. https://cursor.sh, 2024.
[5] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg,
Niklas Lauffer, Andrew Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sampath, Maya
Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy, Sean Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Vijay Bharadwaj,
Jeff Holm, Raja Aluri, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Noah Jacobson, Bing Liu, and
Brad Kenstler. SWE-Bench Pro: Can AI agents solve long-horizon software
engineering tasks?arXiv preprint, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.16941. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.16941.
[6] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida
Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. LiveCodeBench:
Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code.
arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07974.
[7] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir
Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-
world GitHub issues?arXiv preprint, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.06770. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770.
[8] Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Chong Lim, Po-Yu
Huang, Graham Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried.
VisualWebArena: Evaluating multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks.
arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13649.
[9] Lovable. Lovable. https://lovable.dev, 2025. Accessed: 2026-03-02.
[10] Mike A. Merrill et al. Terminal-Bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic
tasks in command line interfaces.arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2601.11868.
[11] Evan Miller. Adding error bars to evals: A statistical approach to language model
evaluations.arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00640.
[12] Samuel Miserendino, Michele Wang, Tejal Patwardhan, and Johannes Heidecke.
SWE-Lancer: Can frontier LLMs earn $1 million from real-world freelance soft-
ware engineering?arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12115.
[13] Magnus Müller and Gregor Zunić. Browser use: Enable AI to control your
browser. https://github.com/browser-use/browser-use, 2024. Accessed: 2026-03-
03.
[14] OpenAI. Introducing SWE-bench verified. https://openai.com/index/introducing-
swe-bench-verified/, 2024. Accessed: 2026-03-03.
[15] OpenAI. Codex. https://developers.openai.com/codex, 2025. Accessed: 2026-03-
02.
[16] Sida Peng, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer. The impact of
AI on developer productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot.arXiv preprint,
2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.06590. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06590.
[17] Replit. Replit agent. https://replit.com/products/agent, 2025. Accessed: 2026-03-
02.
[18] Stack Overflow. Developer survey 2024. https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2024,
2024.
[19] Supabase. Supabase. https://supabase.com, 2024. Accessed: 2026-02-27.
[20] SWE-Bench. SWE-Bench leaderboard. https://www.swebench.com, 2026. Ac-
cessed: 2026-02-27.
[21] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen
Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jasber Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang
Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff,
Ziyang Zhang, Botian Jiang, Yongliang Shen, Weiming Lu, Stephanie Lin, Yuqing
Du, Wenhu Chen, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for
AI software developers as generalist agents.arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741.
[22] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless:
Demystifying LLM-based software engineering agents.arXiv preprint, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01489.
[23] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable
automated software engineering.arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2405.15793.
[24] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar,
Xianyi Cheng, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. We-
bArena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents.arXiv
preprint, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.13854. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
13854.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
A Artifacts
The modified version of OpenHands that was used can be found at https://github.com/vals-ai/VibeCodeBench-Openhands-Scaffold. The full
set of trajectories and generated apps for the models can be found here: https://github.com/vals-ai/vibe-code-bench-paper-artifacts. The
example specification, UI tests, and prompt for the harness are in Appendices F, G, and E.
B Pass-Rate Histograms for All Models
Figure 6: Application pass-rate histograms for all evaluated models (test split).

--- PAGE 12 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
C Tools Provided
(a) OpenHands tools (7).
# Tool Name Description
1execute_bash Execute a bash command in a persistent shell session. Supports chaining,
background processes, interactive input, and configurable timeouts.
2browser Interact with a web page via 15 browser actions: navigate, click, fill, scroll,
hover, press, select option, double-click, focus, clear, drag-and-drop, upload
file, go back/forward, and wait.
3str_replace_editor View, create, and edit files. Commands:view, create, str_replace, insert,
undo_edit. Requires exact string matching for replacements.
4execute_ipython_cell Run Python code in an IPython environment with persistent variables and
%pipmagic support.
5think Log a reasoning step for planning and brainstorming. Does not execute code
or produce side effects.
6finishSignal task completion with a summary message; ends the interaction.
7task_tracker Structured task management. Commands: view (show task list) and plan
(create/update tasks with status tracking).
(b) Supabase Studio MCP tools (11).
# Tool Name Description
1execute_sql Execute a raw SQL query against the Postgres database. Intended for DML
and one-off statements.
2apply_migration Apply a DDL migration with version tracking. Requires a snake_case name
and a SQL query.
3list_tablesList all tables in one or more schemas (defaults topublic).
4list_extensionsList all installed Postgres extensions.
5list_migrationsList all previously applied migrations.
6get_logs Fetch logs by service type (api, postgres, auth, storage, realtime, edge-
function, branch-action) from the last 24 hours.
7get_advisors Retrieve security or performance advisory notices (e.g. missing RLS policies).
8get_project_urlReturn the API URL for the Supabase project.
9get_anon_keyReturn the anonymous API key for the project.
10generate_typescript_typesGenerate TypeScript type definitions from the database schema.
11search_docs Search the Supabase documentation via a GraphQL query. Returns guides,
CLI references, API references, and troubleshooting content.
(c) Tavily MCP tools (4).
# Tool Name Description
1tavily-search Real-time web search with customizable depth, domain filtering, time-range
filtering, and support for general and news topics. Returns titles, URLs,
content snippets, and optional images.
2tavily-extract Extract and process content from specified URLs with basic or advanced
parsing modes, including tables and embedded content.
3tavily-crawl Systematically crawl websites starting from a base URL with configurable
depth, breadth limits, domain filtering, and path pattern matching.
4tavily-map Create structured site maps by analyzing website structure and navigation
paths. Supports configurable depth, domain restrictions, and category filter-
ing.
D Generation and Evaluation Hyper-Parameters
All generation runs used the same API retry policy (maximum 20 retries with 15–120s backoff).

--- PAGE 13 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
Table 12: Generation LLM hyper-parameters for all 16 models.
Model ID Temp Top-p Reasoning Vision Disabled
openai/gpt-5.3-codex-api-previewn/a n/a xhigh -
anthropic/claude-opus-4-61.0 1 - -
openai/gpt-5.2n/a 1 xhigh -
anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-61.0 1 - -
anthropic/claude-opus-4-6-thinking1.0 provider default - -
openai/gpt-5.2-codexn/a 1 high -
google/gemini-3.1-pro-preview1.0 1 high -
zai/glm-51.0 0.95 -✓
google/gemini-3-flash-preview1.0 provider default high -
alibaba/qwen3.5-plus-thinking0.6 provider default - -
kimi/kimi-k2.5-thinking1.0 0.95 - -
minimax/MiniMax-M2.51.0 0.95 -✓
openai/gpt-5-mini-2025-08-07n/a n/a high -
anthropic/claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-thinking1.0 1 - -
deepseek-v3p2-thinking (via Fireworks)1.0 provider default high✓
grok/grok-4-1-fast-reasoning0.7 0.95 - -
Table 13: UI evaluation hyper-parameters for the fixed evaluator used in reported runs.
Parameter Value
Evaluator model Claude Sonnet 4.5
LLM adapter in Browser UseChatAnthropic(model)
Model sampling override✓(none set in evaluator code)
Browser mode headless
Window/viewport 1920×1200
Agent flagsuse_vision=True,use_thinking=True,calculate_cost=True
LLM timeout (per call) 90s
Step timeout 1200s
Max agent steps (per workflow) 100
App startup timeout 180s
Per-app task timeout 7200s
Workflow pass threshold≥90% substeps passed
E Generation System Prompt
This was the prompt passed into the OpenHands harness to produce the application. Placeholders are replaced at runtime.
You are a great software engineer developing new web applications .
You will be given a specification sheet for a web application meant to be used on a computer browser ( usual computer screen , do not use
mobile screen sizes ) . Your task is to build the application .
It is crucial your code works and follows the specification and deployment instructions given below . Focus hard when writing the code .
You CANNOT interact with the user at any point , you are on your own . Everything that is asked of you must be done in the code before you
submit your work .
You CANNOT expect the user to perform any actions during or after the code is written .
DO NOT stop working until you have a fully working application that you have tested .
IT IS CRITICAL THAT YOU MAKE SURE TO TEST THE APPLICATION BEFORE SUBMITTING YOUR WORK , INCLUDING MAKING SURE YOU BUILD AND START THE DOCKER
COMPOSE APPLICATION . DO NOT SUBMIT APPLICATIONS THAT DO NOT RUN . ALWAYS ASSUME ANY ERRORS IN BUILDING OR TESTING THE APPLICATION ARE
YOUR FAULT AND YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO FIX .
< TECH_STACK_GUIDELINES >
Tech stack guidelines :
Always use ** React with Vite ** as the framework for the frontend .
Do not use Next . js or any other framework unless explicitly requested .
Project scaffold guidelines :
1. The target directory already exists ( e . g . , " generated - app ") . Create any necessary folders and files within this directory , ** without **
deleting any pre - existing files .
- Example :
cd generated - app
yes | npm create vite@latest frontend -- -- template react
- ** Do not overwrite`. env`** or any other files that the user has provided . . env is CRUCIAL for the development and testing of the
application . You may copy some of the secrets to different places or append to this file , but always keep the original secrets
intact .
2. Keep the project ** minimal and lightweight **.
3. Treat ** Supabase as the backend ** ( auth , database , storage , API ) using the`@supabase / supabase - js`client ( supabase details below ) .

--- PAGE 14 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
4. Organize frontend code in a flat folder structure under`frontend / src /`:
-`src / components /`-> reusable UI components
-`src / pages /`-> page components
-`src / hooks /`-> custom React hooks
-`src / lib /`-> helper functions ( e . g . , Supabase client )
5. Use ** React Router ** for navigation if multiple pages are required .
6. Write clean , composable , and reusable code ; avoid unnecessary boilerplate .
7. Follow Vite + React best practices :
- Always use ** ES modules ** (`import`/`export`)
- Lazy - load large components via`React . lazy`or dynamic imports
- Do not modify Vite's default config unless necessary
8. Try to use Tailwind CSS v3 . When scaffolding shadcn / ui , use`shadcn@2 .3.0`for compatibility .
Backend Services ( use only when necessary ) for specific API endpoints :
Use Express . js with Node . js for API endpoints that can't be handled by Supabase
Examples of when a backend service is needed :
Most likely : third - party API integrations that require server - side secrets : Stripe , etc .
Less likely : complex business logic that requires server - side processing , but only if it is truly necessary .
Keep REST API simple : use / api /[ resource ] structure
Always validate inputs and handle errors gracefully
Refer to the deployment setup for details on how to set it up and include it in the application
Remember : most functionality should be handled by Supabase - only create backend services for truly necessary cases
</ TECH_STACK_GUIDELINES >
< UI_UX_DESIGN_GUIDELINES >
UI / UX Design Guidelines :
You must create a modern , professional interface . Make sure your nice design is actually rendered in the application .
Follow these principles to create high - quality , professional interfaces :
Visual Design :
- Use consistent design system with unified color tokens , typography , spacing , and components
- Limit typography to 4 -5 font sizes and weights for visual hierarchy
- Stick to 1 neutral base color ( e . g . , zinc ) and up to 2 accent colors maximum
- Always use multiples of 4 for padding and margins to maintain visual rhythm
Component Architecture :
- Build modular , reusable components to avoid duplication
- Factor repeated UI patterns into shared components
- Keep components small and focused , avoiding unnecessary complexity
User Experience :
- Use fixed height containers with internal scrolling for long content streams
- Implement skeleton placeholders or`animate - pulse`for loading states
- Indicate clickability with hover transitions (`hover : bg -*`,`hover : shadow - md`)
- Provide clear visual feedback for user interactions and state changes
- Ensure responsive design that works across different screen sizes
CRITICAL : The design system is everything . You should never write custom styles in components , you should always use the design system and
customize it and the UI components ( including shadcn components ) to make them look beautiful with the correct variants . You never use
classes like text - white , bg - white , etc . You always use the design system tokens .
- Maximize reusability of components .
- Leverage the index . css and tailwind . config . ts files to create a consistent design system that can be reused across the app instead of
custom styles everywhere .
- Create variants in the components you'll use . Shadcn components are made to be customized !
- You review and customize the shadcn components to make them look beautiful with the correct variants .
- CRITICAL : USE SEMANTIC TOKENS FOR COLORS , GRADIENTS , FONTS , ETC . It's important you follow best practices . DO NOT use direct colors like
text - white , text - black , bg - white , bg - black , etc . Everything must be themed via the design system defined in the index . css and tailwind .
config . ts files !
- Always consider the design system when making changes .
- Pay attention to contrast , color , and typography .
- Always generate responsive designs .
- Beautiful designs are your top priority , so make sure to edit the index . css and tailwind . config . ts files as often as necessary to avoid
boring designs and leverage colors and animations .
- Pay attention to dark vs light mode styles of components . You should avoid making mistakes like having white text on white background and
vice versa . You should make sure to use the correct styles for each mode .
</ UI_UX_DESIGN_GUIDELINES >
< SUPABASE_INTEGRATION >
Supabase Integration :
You must use Supabase for database , authentication , and storage .
The Supabase service is already running and configured . You SHOULD NOT reproduce any of the Supabase services locally .
Focus on using the MCP tools and the SDK to interact with the Supabase service as described below . You cannot use the default CLI as if
you were accessing Supabase Cloud .
The keys and URLs you will need are in the . env file :`SUPABASE_PROJECT_URL`,`SUPABASE_ANON_KEY`,`SUPABASE_SERVICE_ROLE_KEY`.
Database :
- Use the MCP tools for all database operations ( you have access to a self - hosted Supabase database )
- The only way to interact with the database is through the MCP tools available to you
- Do not create separate database services in Docker
- When calling MCP SQL tools , pass statements via the`query`argument ( both`execute_sql`and`apply_migration`expect it )
- Respect Row Level Security ( RLS ) and database constraints . Define explicit foreign keys and unique indexes for all relationships , and
ensure all inserts / updates satisfy referential integrity to avoid " missing relation " and " duplicate key " errors .
- Capture schema changes as real migrations : prefer the`apply_migration`tool so Supabase records the version , and check the generated
SQL into`supabase / migrations /`. If you must fall back to`execute_sql`, send exactly one statement per call so the tool can parse
the result reliably .
- For admin / seed operations that require bypassing RLS , use the service role key ; for user - facing flows , use the anon key and create
appropriate RLS policies . Never disable RLS .

--- PAGE 15 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
- Apply schema migrations and policies via the MCP SQL tools before running the app .
Seeding & Test Data :
- Provide a minimal seed routine that creates the records required by the spec and tests ( e . g . , at least one event and organizer with
valid relations ) .
- Make seeding idempotent : upsert by natural keys to avoid duplicate key violations .
- Document how to run the seed and run it before UI testing .
Authentication & Storage :
- Use Supabase SDK for authentication and file storage
- Use MCP tools for server - side database operations and setup .
- The Studio MCP server does not expose auth - user helpers . For seeding or admin automation , call Supabase Auth directly using the
service role key -- either via`supabase . auth . admin .*`in the SDK or by POSTing to`/ auth / v1 / admin / users`through Kong . Document
any seeded credentials in the README .
- Implement proper auth flows ( login , signup , logout , protected routes ) , if it is required by the spec .
- Handle authentication state management properly
- For the authentication , the email verification is disabled , as well as the third - party authentication like Google , Apple , etc . Do not
try to use them .
- If there is an authentication flow , strongly test it , as it is the entry point of the application and if it doesn't work , the
application won't work .
- Use Supabase storage for file uploads when needed
Additional Services :
- You only can use Supabase authentication , database , and storage .
- You DO NOT have access to edge functions , neither with MCP nor directly with SDK / CLI .
- Any other services you may need must be written in the backend service , only if it is crucial .
Configuration :
- DO NOT hardcode any API keys , secrets , or URLs in the docker - compose . yml file
- All sensitive configuration must be in a . env file . The . env file already contains the necessary URL and API keys for you to use the
Supabase service .
- Reference Supabase documentation if needed : https :// supabase . com / docs and https :// supabase . com / docs / reference .
- Keep in mind the user will not be able to access the Supabase service once you have submitted the app .
</ SUPABASE_INTEGRATION >
< EMAIL_SERVICES >
Email Services :
- You have access to a MailHog SMTP server , that will keep running during both development and testing .
- You can use it to create email sending workflows in your application . The server can handle sending and receiving from and to any email
address .
- The application should send emails via SMTP ( config in . env : MAILHOG_SMTP_HOST , M AI LHO G_ SM TP _P ORT )
- Use MailHog without SMTP auth ; omit the auth block unless both SMTP_USER and SMTP_PASS are provided .
- You can access the website at the MAILHOG_WEB_URL ( in . env ) to see the emails that are sent .
- Use appropriate libraries : nodemailer for Node . js , smtplib for Python , etc .
- ONLY use the MailHog server to send emails , do not try anything else .
</ EMAIL_SERVICES >
< STRIPE_SERVICES >
Stripe Services :
- Do NOT rely on MCP tools for Stripe ; use the official Stripe SDK only .
- Read`STRIPE_SECRET_KEY`and`STRIPE_ACCOUNT_ID`and`STRIPE_PUBLISHABLE_KEY`from environment (. env ) and use them to initialize the SDK
.
- You MUST use the Stripe account ID to make sure your work is isolated to that account .
- Keep the Stripe integration simple and minimal : just a Stripe - hosted Checkout page for payment / subscription with success URL and cancel
URL .
- Never hardcode secrets . All keys / IDs must come from environment variables .
- Never send raw credit card numbers directly to Stripe ; this is unsafe and requires strict PCI compliance .
- All card entry must happen on the Stripe - hosted Checkout page .
- The currency is USD , always use it for all payments , products , and prices .
- For testing , use credit card number 4242 4242 4242 4242 with any CVC and valid future expiration date .
### Required Stripe + Supabase Integration Flow :
** Steps :**
1. ** Create Checkout Session ** ( server - side API route )
- Link Stripe customer to Supabase user via metadata
- Create payment record in Supabase with'pending'status
- Set success_url and cancel_url pointing to your localhost app
- Return session URL to client
2. ** Success Page Verification ** ( CRITICAL !)
- User returns with session_id parameter
- Server - side : Retrieve session from Stripe API to verify payment status
- Update Supabase tables based on verified payment status
- Never trust client - side data for payment fulfillment
** Implementation :**
- Create API routes :`/ api / create - checkout`and`/ api / verify - payment`
- Always verify payments server - side using`stripe . checkout . sessions . retrieve ( sessionId )`
- Update user profiles and payment records in Supabase after verification
- Works perfectly with localhost app + online Stripe services
** IMPORTANT :** Use session status verification on success page instead of webhooks for development . This is reliable and works with
localhost environments .
</ STRIPE_SERVICES >
< DEPLOYMENT_INSTRUCTIONS >
# Deployment Instructions
Docker and Docker Compose are already installed in the environment . Do not try to install them or change the installed versions .

--- PAGE 16 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
The Docker daemon should also be running in the background . Only try to start it if you encounter an error such as " Is the docker daemon
running ?".
When you start the app , it should be available at the APP_PUBLIC_URL and APP_PUBLIC_PORT , using localhost .
The different services ( like Supabase ) you have access to are using a different host , because they are running in a different place than
your development environment . Keep it that way for those services , but for your application , use localhost .
Inside the frontend , you should not hardcode any backend or Supabase URLs you query ; instead , you should append them as variables to a . env
file .
You are asked to make the application runnable with Docker Compose .
It must be runnable from the generated - app directory , i . e . , {{ workspace_path }}/ generated - app / in your case .
The project structure should be :
```
{{ workspace_path }}/
. b r o w s e r _ s c r e e n s h o t s / ( DO NOT DELETE - used for testing )
. downloads / ( DO NOT DELETE - used for testing )
generated - app /
. env ( DO NOT DELETE OR OVERWRITE - this file is provided before you start working on the application . It contains provided environment
variables you will need for your application . Do not overwrite it . You may need to copy the values to other . env file ) .
docker - compose . yml
frontend /
. env ( if necessary )
. dockerignore
Dockerfile . frontend # Dockerfile for the frontend
src / # folder created by the Vite CLI , containing the frontend code
... other folders / files ...
backend / # Only create a backend if necessary
. env ( if necessary )
. dockerignore
Dockerfile . backend
... other folders / files ...
```
The backend folder is optional - you only need to create it if necessary .
If you use CLI tools to initialize the app , never use options that can delete existing files you are provided with , especially the . env file
.
This . env file contains crucial information for you to build the application and to test it .
## Docker Compose Setup
- Create a single`docker - compose . yml`file in the project root ({{ workspace_path }}/ generated - app /)
- Name the frontend service exactly`{ project_id }`( this service will be exposed )
- Do NOT use`networks`configuration - only fill in the`services`section
- Do NOT use`container_name`fields
- Remember that at application test time , there will be no cached Docker images , so you must make sure the build command works .
- Always run the container by building and then previewing it ( e . g .`npm run build`followed by`npm run preview`,`npm run serve`, or`npm
start`) ; avoid`npm run dev`.
- In case you need to save data outside of what Supabase already provides , DO NOT rely on Docker Compose creating persistent volumes for
your app's data , because in the testing environment those volumes might not be preserved . Instead , any data your app needs to persist
should be stored in normal files inside the container ( or a path you control ) , so that the tests can access it reliably .
- Keep the docker - compose . yml and the Dockerfiles minimal , as simple as possible .
- This doesn't need to be production - ready ; it just needs to run in development / preview mode . A simple Dockerfile is enough -- no need for a
multi - stage or optimized production setup .
- DO NOT use the network_mode field in the docker - compose . yml file .
## Port Configuration
- The app landing page URL is defined by`APP_PUBLIC_URL`in the`. env`; treat it as the source of truth and never assume`http :// localhost
:4173`.
- Always map the host port from`APP_PUBLIC_PORT`to the frontend preview port`4173`in Docker Compose ( for example ,`ports : - " $ {
APP_PUBLIC_PORT }:4173"`) .
- Do not override`APP_PUBLIC_URL`or`APP_PUBLIC_PORT`inside your code ; surface them through environment variables so both frontend and
backend use the same public origin .
- Always import the port from the . env file , never hardcode it in the application code anywhere .
- Configure Vite to listen on all interfaces for both dev and preview ( set`server . host`/`preview . host`to`0.0.0.0`or pass`-- host
0.0.0.0`) .
- If you add backend services that are internal - only , prefer`expose : - 8000`instead of publishing them to the host .
## Example of minimal docker - compose . yml and Dockerfile ( they might need to be more complex depending on the project ) . These match all the
requirements described above . You might need them to be more complicated depending on the project ( especially if you need backend
services ) , but always strive to keep it simple :
```dockerfile
FROM node :22 - alpine
WORKDIR / app
COPY package *. json ./
RUN npm install
COPY . .
RUN npm run build
EXPOSE 4173
CMD [" npm " , " run " , " preview "]
```
```yaml
services :
donat ion_mana ger :
build :
context : ./ frontend
dockerfile : Dockerfile . frontend
ports :
- " $ { APP_PUBLIC_PORT }:4173" # APP_PUBLIC_PORT should always be imported from the . env file

--- PAGE 17 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
env_file :
- . env
backend : # Only use a backend service if necessary
build :
context : ./ backend
dockerfile : Dockerfile . backend
env_file :
- . env
expose : # NEVER use ports : - 8000:8000 kind of configuration here , as it would publish the backend port outside of the Docker Compose
network
- 8000
```
Example of a minimal backend Dockerfile ( if necessary ) :
```
FROM node :22 - alpine
WORKDIR / app
COPY package *. json ./
RUN npm install
COPY . .
# Copy only what the backend needs , not the entire frontend
EXPOSE 8000
CMD [" node " , " server . js "]
```
## Docker Ignore
Always include a`. dockerignore`file in any relevant folder ( e . g . frontend / , backend / , etc .) to avoid copying unnecessary files into the
container image .
At minimum , ignore build outputs and dependency folders such as : node_modules , dist , build , etc .
Example of a`. dockerignore`file :
```
node_modules
. next
dist
. git
```
## Development & Testing Workflow
1. ** Initial build ( and try before submitting ) **:`docker compose -p { project_id } up -d -- build`
2. ** After code changes **:`docker compose -p { project_id } restart < service >`
3. ** Only rebuild when **: dependencies or docker - compose . yml change
4. ** Check the logs to make sure the application is running correctly **: Run`docker compose -p { project_id } logs -- tail 200`( or wrap`logs
-f`in a short`timeout`) so the command exits on its own .
5. ** Test the app through the UI **: You must browse the running application and take screenshots ( you MUST save them in`{{ workspace_path
}}/. b r o w s e r _ s c r e e n s h o t s /`) to verify functionality
6. ** Before submitting **: Run`docker compose -p { project_id } down -v`
7. ** Report **: Report how testing went in your final thoughts before submitting your work . Mention what worked or did not work , and whether
you followed the expected workflow . Report precisely any deployment errors or issues you encountered .
## Mandatory Testing
- Browse the running application and take screenshots to verify functionality
- Fix issues and restart services until you've verified everything works
- Save all screenshots in`{{ workspace_path }}/. b r o w s e r _ s c r e e n s h o t s /`
The application must be fully functional when run with the following command from {{ workspace_path }}/ generated - app /:
```bash
docker compose -p { project_id } up -d -- build
```
</ DEPLOYMENT_INSTRUCTIONS >
Absolutely No Mocks or Stubs ( Hard Requirement ) :
- Do not mock payments or return hardcoded success for checkout / subscription flows . A real Stripe test - mode call must occur .
- Do not mock email sending ; use SMTP with the env values and send test emails ( MailHog will capture them in dev ) .
- Avoid in - memory replacements for required services when the spec calls for them ( e . g . , do not replace Supabase / Stripe with in - memory
data for subscriptions or billing flows ) .
- Submissions that include phrases like " mock Stripe " , " fake payment " , or bypass external calls will be rejected .
< README_INSTRUCTIONS >
README instructions :
You must create two READMEs for the application :
First , a technical TECHNI CAL_READ ME . md at project root in {{ workspace_path }}/ generated - app / , at most one page long , with :
1. General Implementation
- App overview and key features
- Tech stack summary
- Architecture approach
2. Code Structure
- Frontend / backend directory layout
- Key files and their purposes
- Database schema
Second , a user - friendly USER_README . md at project root in {{ workspace_path }}/ generated - app / , at most one page long , with :
1. Navigation Guide to Test the Application
- Authentication ( admin or not ) method if any
- Key URLs and actions
- If there is an authentication flow , provide default credentials to be able to test the application without recreating an account .
Note : Exclude startup instructions - app runs via Docker commands in deployment docs
</ README_INSTRUCTIONS >

--- PAGE 18 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
< GENERAL_INSTRUCTIONS_AND_ADVICE >
General Instructions and Advice :
- The folder you are working in is`{{ workspace_path }}`. You cannot write outside of this folder . It also may contain the following files
and folders , that you CANNOT delete in any circumstance ( it would break the application ) :
```
{{ workspace_path }}/
. b r o w s e r _ s c r e e n s h o t s /
. downloads /
generated - app /
```
- You must create your application in`{{ workspace_path }}/ generated - app /`directory . This is where your docker - compose . yml , . env file , and
all application code should be placed .
- The . b r o w s e r _ s c r e e n s h o t s / and . downloads / folders at the`{{ workspace_path }}`level must NEVER be deleted or moved - they are used for
testing purposes .
- If you have trouble loading data in the application , make sure to`docker compose -p {{ project_id }} down -v`before running`docker
compose -p {{ project_id }} up -d`again . It will clear the volumes and start fresh .
- Ensure proper error handling and user feedback for all operations .
- Strictly restrict yourself to the services you have access to . Do not try to implement services that are not available to you . If a
feature requires an additional service that you do not have access to , just ignore that feature , or worst case create a button that
just shows an error " missing service ".
- If you encounter issues with the infrastructure you are running in , make sure to put them in your final thoughts before submitting your
work . For example , mention any problems you encountered when trying to test the application , especially Docker - related issues . Make
sure to report the commands that failed with the error message .
- You must focus on doing the full task . Do not abandon until you have completed the task or try as much as possible to complete the task .
If you encounter errors that you believe are not expected , do not give up , try to fix them or go around them .
- You are on your own , you CANNOT interact with the user at any point . Do not expect them to take any actions after the code is written .
The only thing the user will do is use the application and see if it is working as expected .
- Before running any UI tests , run the project's seed routine to ensure required data exists and relationships are valid ( avoid RLS and
constraint errors during evaluation ) .
</ GENERAL_INSTRUCTIONS_AND_ADVICE >
< TASK_INSTRUCTIONS >
Specification for the application . Follow the instructions below closely to build the application :
{{ spec }}
</ TASK_INSTRUCTIONS >
F Spec Example
Zeeter Social Network
Overview
Deliver a browser - based short - form social app where members publish text updates , follow users , and interact through likes , comments , and in
- app notifications . Guests can browse public content but cannot perform member actions .
User Roles
- Guest : Browses public profiles and public posts .
- Member : Signs up , manages profile , creates / edits / deletes own posts , follows other members , likes and comments on posts , and views
notifications .
Authentication
- Members sign up with username , email , and password .
- Members sign in with username or email plus password .
- Email verification is not required .
- Guests can browse public content without signing in .
Core Features
1. Accounts and Profiles
- Members can create accounts with username , email , and password .
- Members can set and update display name , bio , and profile image .
- Public profile pages show member identity fields and recent posts .
2. Posts
- Members can create posts from the home feed .
- Post content is limited to 280 characters .
- Members can edit and delete only their own posts .
3. Feed and Discovery
- Member home feed includes followed - member content and discovery content .
- Feed supports sorting by Newest and Trending .
- Feed supports search by keyword and hashtag .
4. Social Interactions
- Members can follow other members .
- Members can like posts .
- Members can comment on posts .

--- PAGE 19 ---
Vibe Code Bench: Evaluating AI Models on End-to-End Web Application Development
5. In - App Notifications
- Notifications page shows follow , like , and comment events relevant to the member .
Content and Constraints
- Text - only posting experience for this version ( no media in posts ) .
- All key workflows must be executable in one browser session .
Primary User Flows
- Onboard and profile setup : sign up , complete profile fields , land on feed .
- Publish and manage posts : create a post , edit it , and delete it .
- Social engagement : follow , like , and comment across two member accounts .
- Guest restrictions : browse public content but block member - only actions .
- Discovery usage : sort feed and search by hashtag / keyword .
G UI Test Example
test_workflows :
o n b o a r d i n g _ a n d _ p r o f i l e _ s e t u p :
id : id_0
title : Onboarding and Profile Setup
purpose : Verify a new member can sign up with username , email , and password , complete profile setup , and land on the home feed .
num_substeps : 6
steps :
- 1. Navigate to the Zeeter app and open the sign - up page .
- 2. Sign up with username'zeeter_0', email'zeeter_ 0@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 3. Complete profile setup with display name'Zeeter Zero'and bio'First Zeeter profile setup'.
- 4. Upload a valid profile image and save profile changes .
- 5. Verify the app navigates to the signed - in home feed .
- 6. Open the public profile for'zeeter_0'and verify display name , bio , and profile image are visible .
u p d a t e _ p r o f i l e _ f i e l d s :
id : id_1
title : Update Profile Fields
purpose : Verify a member can update display name , bio , and profile image after account creation .
num_substeps : 6
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_1', email'zeeter_ 1@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Open the profile settings page .
- 3. Change display name to'Zeeter One Updated'and update bio to'Updated Zeeter profile bio'.
- 4. Upload or replace the profile image .
- 5. Save changes and verify an in - app success confirmation appears .
- 6. Open the public profile for'zeeter_1'and verify updated fields are displayed .
c r e a t e _ p o s t _ f r o m _ f e e d :
id : id_2
title : Create Post from Feed
purpose : Verify a member can publish a post from the feed and the post appears in profile history .
num_substeps : 6
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_2', email'zeeter_ 2@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. On the home feed , locate the post composer .
- 3. Enter post text'Gardening update # zeeterpost'.
- 4. Publish the post .
- 5. Verify the post appears in the feed .
- 6. Open the public profile for'zeeter_2'and verify the same post appears in recent posts .
e d i t _ a n d _ d e l e t e _ o w n _ p o s t :
id : id_3
title : Edit and Delete Own Post
purpose : Verify a member can edit and delete only their own post .
num_substeps : 8
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_3', email'zeeter_ 3@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Create a post with content'Original Zeeter message'.
- 3. Open edit for that post , replace content with'Updated Zeeter message', and save .
- 4. Verify the post now shows only'Updated Zeeter message'.
- 5. Delete the same post and confirm deletion .
- 6. Verify the deleted post is no longer visible in the home feed .
- 7. Open the public profile for'zeeter_3'.
- 8. Verify the deleted post is not listed in recent posts .
v i s i t o r _ b r o w s i n g _ a n d _ r e s t r i c t i o n s :
id : id_4
title : Visitor Browsing and Restrictions
purpose : Verify guests can browse public content but cannot perform member - only actions .
num_substeps : 9
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_4', email'zeeter_ 4@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Create a post with content'Public post for guest access check'.
- 3. Open the public profile for'zeeter_4'and then sign out .
- 4. As a guest , navigate back to'zeeter_4'public profile .
- 5. Verify the public post is visible .

--- PAGE 20 ---
Hung Tran, Langston Nashold, Rayan Krishnan, Antoine Bigeard, and Alex Gu
- 6. Attempt to like the post and verify the app blocks the action or prompts sign - in .
- 7. Attempt to comment on the post and verify the app blocks the action or prompts sign - in .
- 8. Navigate to the home feed and verify post creation is unavailable to guests .
- 9. Attempt to follow'zeeter_4'as a guest and verify the app blocks the action or prompts sign - in .
f o l l o w _ m e m b e r _ a n d _ f e e d _ u p d a t e :
id : id_5
title : Follow Member and Feed Update
purpose : Verify following a member updates the follower feed and creates a notification for the followed member .
num_substeps : 11
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_5_a', email'z e e te r _ 5_ a @ ex a m pl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Create a post with content'Follow workflow seed post # followseed'.
- 3. Sign out from'zeeter_5_a'.
- 4. Sign up with username'zeeter_5_b', email'z e e te r _ 5_ b @ ex a m pl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 5. Navigate to the public profile for'zeeter_5_a'.
- 6. Follow'zeeter_5_a'and verify follow state is active .
- 7. Open the home feed and verify the seed post from'zeeter_5_a'appears .
- 8. Sign out from'zeeter_5_b'.
- 9. Sign in with username'zeeter_5_a'( email'z e e te r _ 5_ a @ ex a m pl e . com') and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 10. Open notifications page .
- 11. Verify a new - follower notification referencing'zeeter_5_b'is present .
l i k e _ c o m m e n t _ a n d _ n o t i f i c a t i o n s :
id : id_6
title : Like , Comment , and Notifications
purpose : Verify likes and comments generate expected UI state changes and notifications .
num_substeps : 11
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_6_a', email'z e e te r _ 6_ a @ ex a m pl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Create a post with content'Interaction workflow seed post # interactionseed'.
- 3. Sign out from'zeeter_6_a'.
- 4. Sign up with username'zeeter_6_b', email'z e e te r _ 6_ b @ ex a m pl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 5. Open the public profile for'zeeter_6_a'and locate the seed post .
- 6. Like the post and verify the like state updates .
- 7. Submit comment'Great update from zeeter_6_b'.
- 8. Verify the comment appears under the post .
- 9. Sign out from'zeeter_6_b'.
- 10. Sign in with username'zeeter_6_a'( email'z e e te r _ 6_ a @ ex a m pl e . com') and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 11. Verify notifications include both the like and comment from'zeeter_6_b'.
f e e d _ s o r t i n g _ n e w e s t _ a n d _ t r e n d i n g :
id : id_7
title : Feed Sorting by Newest and Trending
purpose : Verify feed sorting supports Newest ordering and Trending engagement - based discovery .
num_substeps : 10
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_7_a', email'z e e te r _ 7_ a @ ex a m pl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Create post P1 with content'Trending seed post # zeetertrend'.
- 3. Create post P2 with content'Newest seed post # zeetertrend'.
- 4. Sign out from'zeeter_7_a'.
- 5. Sign up with username'zeeter_7_b', email'z e e te r _ 7_ b @ ex a m pl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 6. Navigate to'zeeter_7_a'profile and like P1 .
- 7. Sign out from'zeeter_7_b'and sign in with username'zeeter_7_a'( email'ze e t er _ 7_ a @ ex a m pl e . com') and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 8. Set feed sorting to Newest and verify P2 appears above P1 .
- 9. Set feed sorting to Trending .
- 10. Verify P1 ranks above P2 in Trending based on the like received from'zeeter_7_b'.
s e a r c h _ b y _ k e y w o r d _ a n d _ h a s h t a g :
id : id_8
title : Search by Keyword and Hashtag
purpose : Verify search supports both keyword and hashtag queries .
num_substeps : 7
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_8', email'zeeter_ 8@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Create a post with content'Gardening updates # urbanfarm'.
- 3. Create a second post with content'Book club planning tonight'.
- 4. Search for hashtag'# urbanfarm'.
- 5. Verify the gardening post appears and the'Book club'post is not shown in hashtag results .
- 6. Search for keyword'Book club'.
- 7. Verify the'Book club planning tonight'post appears in results .
p o s t _ c h a r a c t e r _ l i m i t _ v a l i d a t i o n :
id : id_9
title : Post Character Limit Validation
purpose : Verify post creation enforces the 280 - character limit .
num_substeps : 6
steps :
- 1. Sign up with username'zeeter_9', email'zeeter_ 9@exampl e . com', and password'UserPass123 !'.
- 2. Attempt to publish a post with text'A'repeated 281 times .
- 3. Verify publishing is blocked and an in - app validation message indicates the content exceeds the limit .
- 4. Enter a post with text'B'repeated 280 times .
- 5. Publish the 280 - character post .
- 6. Verify the post is created and visible in the feed .
