--- PAGE 1 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability
Reproduction
BIN LIU,Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
YANJIE ZHAO∗,Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
ZHENPENG CHEN,Tsinghua University, China
GUOAI XU∗,Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
HAOYU WANG,Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
Automated vulnerability reproduction from CVE descriptions requires generating executable Proof-of-Concept
(PoC) exploits and validating them in target environments. This process is critical in software security research
and practice, yet remains time-consuming and demands specialized expertise when performed manually.
While LLM agents show promise for automating this task, existing approaches often conflate exploring
attack directions with fixing implementation details, which leads to unproductive debugging loops when
reproduction fails. To address this, we proposeCve2PoC, an LLM-based dual-loop agent framework following
a plan-execute-evaluate paradigm. The Strategic Planner analyzes vulnerability semantics and target code to
produce structured attack plans. The Tactical Executor generates PoC code and validates it through progressive
verification. The Adaptive Refiner evaluates execution results and routes failures to different loops: theTactical
Loopfor code-level refinement, while theStrategic Loopfor attack strategy replanning. This dual-loop design
enables the framework to escape ineffective debugging by matching remediation to failure type. Evaluation
on two benchmarks covering 617 real-world vulnerabilities demonstrates thatCve2PoCachieves 82.9% and
54.3% reproduction success rates on SecBench.js and PatchEval, respectively, outperforming the best baseline
by 11.3% and 20.4%. Human evaluation confirms that generated PoCs achieve comparable code quality to
human-written exploits in readability and reusability.
CCS Concepts:•Software and its engineering→Software testing and debugging.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: PoC Generation, LLM Agents, Vulnerability Reproduction
ACM Reference Format:
Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang. 2026. A Dual-Loop Agent Framework
for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction. 1, 1 (February 2026), 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.
nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
Software vulnerabilities pose an escalating threat to digital security. The National Vulnerability
Database has documented explosive growth in vulnerability disclosures in recent years [26]. How-
ever, available CVE reports mainly provide natural language descriptions or structured metadata,
∗Yanjie Zhao (yanjie_zhao@hust.edu.cn) and Guoai Xu (xga@hit.edu.cn) are the corresponding authors.
Authors’ Contact Information: Bin Liu, liubin1999@stu.hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China; Yanjie
Zhao, yanjie_zhao@hust.edu.cn, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China; Zhenpeng Chen, zpchen@
tsinghua.edu.cn, Tsinghua University, China; Guoai Xu, xga@hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China;
Haoyu Wang, haoyuwang@hust.edu.cn, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM XXXX-XXXX/2026/2-ART
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.
arXiv:2602.05721v2  [cs.SE]  8 Feb 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
without the executable and reproducible Proof-of-Concept (PoC) exploits that are essential for
verifying authenticity and assessing impact. Empirical studies show that successfully reproducing
disclosed vulnerabilities remains challenging even for professional security teams due to inadequate
information in reports [25], creating substantial uncertainty in vulnerability verification, patch
validation, and defense deployment.
The scarcity of executable PoCs stems from the complexity of manual reproduction.
Transforming vulnerability descriptions into working PoCs requires understanding exploitation
mechanisms from text information, configuring appropriate runtime environments for specific
software versions, and implementing attack code that successfully triggers the vulnerability. These
steps demand specialized security expertise and substantial time investment, making manual
reproduction inherently difficult to scale as vulnerability disclosures continue to grow. Automated
approaches are therefore essential to bridge this reproduction gap.
Traditional automated techniques, including static analysis [10, 33], dynamic fuzzing [13, 48],
and symbolic execution [4, 24], cannot address this challenge, as they lack mechanisms to interpret
natural language vulnerability specifications and generate corresponding exploitation code. Large
Language Models (LLMs) present a qualitatively different approach. Their ability to understand and
synthesize code enables direct transformation from textual vulnerability descriptions to executable
programs [35]. This potential has motivated recent investigations into LLM-based agents augmented
with execution environments and tool interfaces for autonomous PoC generation. Representative
systems include OpenHands [ 42], a general software engineering agent that can interact with
code repositories and be adapted for vulnerability reproduction tasks; CAI [23], an open-source
framework enabling security professionals to construct AI-driven offensive automation; and PoC-
Gen [37], a specialized system targeting npm package vulnerabilities through multi-stage pipelines
that combine static analysis with reasoning.
Although these systems represent important progress,existing LLM-based agents face a
fundamental architectural limitation: their single-cycle workflows repeatedly revise generated
code without distinguishing the underlying causes of failure. When a PoC fails to execute properly,
the agent cannot identify whether the problem lies in choosing the wrong attack method or simply
making mistakes while implementing a correct method. This inability to distinguish leads to either
wasting resources on perfecting exploitation ideas that cannot succeed or discarding promising
approaches due to easily fixable errors. These issues are amplified by insufficient examination of
vulnerability semantics before generating code and unreliable validation techniques that cannot
confidently assess whether the generated PoC actually triggers the target vulnerability.
To fill this gap, we introduceCve2PoC, an agent framework that employs two distinct feedback
mechanisms to separate strategic exploitation planning from tactical code implementation for
automated vulnerability reproduction. The framework operates through dual loops. TheTactical
Loopiterates between Tactical Executor and Adaptive Refiner, correcting code-level issues while
preserving the attack strategy. When tactical fixes prove insufficient, theStrategic Loopreturns
control to Strategic Planner, enabling recovery from incorrect vulnerability interpretations. By
decoupling strategy selection from code debugging, this design avoids both the problem of end-
lessly refining unworkable attack plans and the problem of abandoning valid plans due to fixable
implementation mistakes.
Specifically,Cve2PoCincludes three core modules. First,Strategic Plannerprocesses CVE de-
scriptions to identify exploitation-critical details and inspects vulnerable codebases to construct
structured attack plans, establishing a thorough understanding of the vulnerability before any
code is written. Second,Tactical Executorgenerates PoC code from attack plans and validates it
through progressively stringent multi-layer checks, from syntactic validity to semantic correctness
to execution behavior to differential testing, pinpointing exactly where exploitation attempts fail.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 3 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 3
Third,Adaptive Refineranalyzes verification results to determine failure causes, either trigger-
ing replanning when the attack methodology is flawed or performing targeted refinement for
implementation errors, while maintaining a sparse experience index for efficient knowledge reuse.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We proposeCve2PoC, the first dual-loop agent framework separating strategic planning from
tactical execution for automated vulnerability reproduction from CVE descriptions.
•We design three core modules with novel components:Strategic Plannerwith structured attack
planning,Tactical Executorwith progressive multi-layer verification, andAdaptive Refinerwith
dual-dimension feedback and sparse experience retrieval.
• We evaluateCve2PoCon two benchmarks: 387 npm vulnerabilities from SecBench.js [ 3] and 230
vulnerabilities across Go, JavaScript, and Python from PatchEval [44].Cve2PoCachieves 82.9%
and 54.3% reproduction success rates, outperforming state-of-the-art baselines by 11.3% and
20.4% respectively. Human evaluation confirms that generated PoCs achieve comparable quality
to human-written exploits, scoring 4.15 versus 3.62 on a 5-point scale with 14.6% improvement
in readability.
2 Background
2.1 Problem Formalization
We formalize the vulnerability reproduction problem as follows. Given a vulnerability report 𝑉
containing a natural language description 𝐷, an affected software package𝑃, a vulnerable version 𝑣,
and optional metadata 𝑀 (e.g., CVE identifiers, CVSS scores), the goal is to automatically generate
an executable PoC exploit𝐸that satisfies three requirements:
Triggering Requirement.The PoC must successfully trigger the vulnerability when executed
against the vulnerable version 𝑃𝑣, demonstrating the security impact described in 𝐷. This requires
the exploit to satisfy all environmental preconditions and execute the precise attack sequence that
activates the vulnerable code path.
Validation Requirement.The exploitation must be objectively verifiable through observable
evidence, such as unauthorized access, data leakage, privilege escalation, denial of service, or code
execution. Since many vulnerabilities do not produce crashes, verification cannot rely solely on
abnormal program termination.
Specificity Requirement.The PoC should demonstrate vulnerability-specific behavior rather
than generic system failures. It must fail when executed against a patched version𝑃𝑣+1 or alternative
implementations lacking the vulnerability, confirming that observed effects stem from the specific
weakness rather than unrelated issues.
This problem is particularly challenging because it requires bridging multiple semantic gaps:
from unstructured natural language to structured exploitation logic, from abstract vulnerability
descriptions to concrete attack implementations, and from static code analysis to dynamic execution
validation. Unlike vulnerability detection, which identifies potential weaknesses, or patch gener-
ation, which repairs code, reproduction demands demonstrating exploitability through working
attacks.
2.2 Traditional Vulnerability Analysis Approaches
Tools like CodeQL [ 16], Semgrep [33], and Infer [ 5] systematically analyze program structure
without execution, identifying potential vulnerabilities through pattern matching and dataflow
analysis. While highly effective for detecting known vulnerability patterns, they cannot execute
attacks or verify exploitability, thus limiting their applicability to vulnerability reproduction.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
Fuzzing tools such as AFL [48], AFL++ [13], and LibFuzzer [34] generate test inputs to trigger
crashes and errors. Symbolic execution tools like KLEE [4] and KLEEF [24] systematically explore
program paths. However, these techniques require executable binaries or source code with known
vulnerable states and cannot interpret natural language vulnerability descriptions.
Systems like AEG [2] and Mayhem [6] generate exploits from program crashes or vulnerabilities
identified through other means. While pioneering in automation, they assume pre-identified
vulnerable locations and focus on memory corruption vulnerabilities, struggling with logic flaws
common in web applications.
All traditional approaches share a critical constraint: they operate on program artifacts with
known vulnerable states but cannot comprehend the natural language CVE descriptions that
characterize real-world vulnerability disclosures. This semantic gap prevents direct application to
vulnerability reproduction, where the only available information is often unstructured text.
2.3 Security-Focused LLM-Based Agent Systems
Recent research has adapted agent architectures to penetration testing and exploitation. Pentest-
GPT [9] provides interactive attack guidance by combining LLM reasoning with security tool
invocation. AutoPentest [19] automates reconnaissance workflows through structured agent col-
laboration. Fanget al.[ 11] demonstrated that GPT-4 can exploit 87 of one-day vulnerabilities when
provided with CVE descriptions. Zhuet al.[ 52] showed that coordinated agent teams outperform
individual agents on complex multi-step exploits.
Automated PoC Generation Systems.Several systems specifically target automated PoC gen-
eration from vulnerability descriptions. CVE-GENIE [40] coordinates specialized agents through
understanding, planning, and execution phases. PoCGen [ 37] combines LLMs with static and
dynamic program analysis through a multi-phase pipeline, reaching 77% success on npm pack-
ages. VulnBot [21] employs multi-agent collaboration for comprehensive vulnerability assessment.
PoCo [1] generates smart contract exploits compatible with testing frameworks.
2.4 Limitations of Existing Approaches
Despite progress in LLM-based security agents, existing systems exhibit three critical limitations
that motivate our work:
(C1) Lack of Structured Pre-Analysis.Current PoC generation methods jump directly from
vulnerability descriptions to code synthesis without building comprehensive models of exploitation
requirements. For example, PoCGen [37] focuses its analysis phase on locating vulnerable code
rather than systematically modeling how the vulnerability can be triggered. CVE-GENIE [40] noted
that this absence of structured pre-analysis causes agents to resort to blind trial-and-error when
initial attempts fail, wasting computational resources on fundamentally flawed attack strategies.
The problem intensifies for logic vulnerabilities requiring precise sequences of operations, where
understanding triggering conditions before implementation is critical.
(C2) Unreliable Verification Mechanisms.Determining whether a PoC successfully triggers
a vulnerability is inherently challenging. Many exploits produce no crashes: cross-site scripting
may silently inject scripts, SQL injection may return normal responses while leaking data, and
authentication bypasses may appear as ordinary logins. Current approaches employ one of three
inadequate strategies: (1) predefined security checks that cover only limited vulnerability patterns,
failing on novel or complex exploits; (2) generic execution feedback analyzing return codes or
output text without vulnerability-specific oracles, leading to false positives from coincidental output
matches; or (3) differential testing comparing behavior between vulnerable and patched versions,
which requires access to both versions and struggles when patches are unavailable or introduce
unrelated changes. Research on LLM-based code generation has demonstrated that superficial
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 5 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 5
execution success often masks deeper functional failures [22], a problem exacerbated in security
contexts where correct execution may still fail to exploit the vulnerability.
(C3) Flat Decision-Making Without Failure Diagnosis.Existing agent systems employ
single-loop generate-execute-refine cycles that treat all failures uniformly [36]. When a PoC fails,
they cannot distinguish whether the failure stems from a fundamentally incorrect attack strategy or
merely implementation bugs in an otherwise sound approach. This conflation of strategic and tacti-
cal errors leads to two failure modes: (1) wasted effort on iterative refinements of flawed approaches
that cannot possibly succeed, such as attempting SQL injection on endpoints lacking database
queries; (2) premature abandonment of promising strategies due to minor implementation issues,
such as syntax errors or incorrect parameter formats. Experience utilization further complicates
matters, with systems either ignoring past attempts entirely, losing valuable insights, or injecting
full execution histories into context, causing token inflation that degrades model performance [29].
Our Approach.Cve2PoCaddresses these limitations through three architectural mechanisms
that directly correspond to the identified challenges. To addressC1, we introduce a dual-loop archi-
tecture that separates strategic planning from tactical execution, ensuring structured vulnerability
analysis produces comprehensive attack models before code generation. To addressC2, we design
progressive multi-layer verification that combines symbolic analysis with execution feedback and
differential testing, providing reliable assessment of exploitation success across diverse vulnerability
types. To addressC3, we implement adaptive failure diagnosis with sparse experience indexing,
enabling intelligent routing between strategic replanning and tactical refinement while maintaining
efficient context utilization. The following section details our framework design.
3 Methodology
3.1 Overview
As illustrated in Figure 1,Cve2PoCis a dual-loop agent comprising three core modules: Strategic
Planner, Tactical Executor, and Adaptive Refiner.Strategic Plannertackles the lack of structured
understanding by analyzing CVE descriptions and target codebases to synthesize attack plans before
code generation.Tactical Executoraddresses unreliable verification through progressive multi-
layer checks that pinpoint specific failure points rather than producing binary outcomes.Adaptive
Refinerresolves flat decision-making by diagnosing failure causes and routing to appropriate
correction mechanisms: tactical refinement for implementation errors or strategic replanning for
fundamental approach failures.
In particular,Cve2PoCoperates through two feedback loops. TheTactical Loopiterates between
Tactical ExecutorandAdaptive Refiner, correcting code-level issues while preserving the attack
strategy. When tactical fixes prove insufficient, theStrategic Loopreturns control toStrategic
Planner, enabling recovery from incorrect vulnerability interpretations. This separation prevents
wasted effort on refining fundamentally flawed approaches while avoiding premature abandonment
of sound strategies marred by minor bugs.
3.2 Strategic Planner
Existing methods lack structured vulnerability understanding (C1in § 2.4), causing blind trial-
and-error when initial attempts fail.The core insight is that effective exploitation requires
bridging three semantic gaps before code generation:translating high-level descriptions into
precise attack vectors (semantic gap), locating specific vulnerable code paths amid large codebases
(contextual gap), and selecting appropriate execution strategies for diverse targets (operational
gap). We design three specialized agents that bridge these gaps through structured analysis.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
§3.2	StrategicPlanner
CVEDescription
SourceCode
Input
ToolRegistry
InsightAgent
CodeAnalyzer
PlannerAgent
§3.3TacticalExecutor
PoCSynthesizerAgent
ExecutorAgent
SandboxEnvironment
OracleEngineL3LLMJudgeL2PatternMatchingL1	Execution	Status
§3.4	AdaptiveRefiner
RewardShaperTacticalScoreStrategicScore
RefinerAgent
IndexedRewardStoreExploitPlan
PoCexploits
ExecuteOutput
LogsVerificationResultStore/RetrieveContext
RoutingSuggestion
Refine/ResynthesizeSignal
ReplanSignal
StructuredVulnerabilityInsights
CodeEvidence
AutonomousTool-SelectionShell,Docker,Tree-sitter……
ReproduciblePoCs
OutputSuccess
StrategicLoop
TacticalLoop
Fig. 1. Overview of theCve2PoCframework.
3.2.1 InsightAgent: Semantic Gap Bridging.CVE descriptions contain rich exploitation information
encoded in unstructured natural language. The InsightAgent employs schema-guided prompting
to extract this information into a structured specification that constrains subsequent analysis.
Given a CVE description, the agent identifies vulnerability type (e.g., code injection, path traversal),
attack vector (HTTP, command-line interface), vulnerable parameters, and key APIs involved in
exploitation. This structured insight serves two purposes: it provides a high-level constraint on
what to look for in the codebase, and it generates targeted search queries combining vulnerability
patterns with identified APIs.
Listing 1 shows an example extraction where the agent identifies that user input flows to an
eval call via the template parameter on the /api/render endpoint. This specification eliminates
ambiguity and guides targeted code analysis.
3.2.2 CodeAnalyzer: Contextual Gap Bridging.Triggering vulnerabilities requires locating vulner-
able code paths and understanding their invocation requirements. The CodeAnalyzer combines
static analysis with heuristic matching to collect this evidence efficiently. It first runs Semgrep
security rules to identify candidate locations with severity scores. It then filters findings by match-
ing against vulnerability-specific keywords from the InsightAgent output, focusing on high-
confidence matches. For matched locations, the analyzer applies pattern recognition to extract
concrete exploitation parameters: endpoint URLs from route annotations, parameter names from
input retrieval patterns, and payload hints from the vulnerable operations.
Listing 2 illustrates the extracted evidence, showing the exact file, line number, endpoint, param-
eter name, and a suggested payload structure. This provides the concrete code context needed to
construct valid PoCs.
3.2.3 PlannerAgent: Operational Gap Bridging.Different targets require distinct execution strate-
gies: npm vulnerabilities need direct function invocation within Node.js runtimes, while container-
ized applications require Docker-based execution. Hard-coded rules are brittle and fail to generalize
across vulnerability types.We employ LLM-based autonomous planning where the model
selects appropriate tools based on target characteristics.
The system maintains a ToolRegistry (Table 1) where each tool is registered with capability
descriptions. Given vulnerability context (target type, vulnerability type, code characteristics) and
available tool descriptions, the LLM generates a structured exploitation plan containing execution
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 7 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 7
{
" vu l n er a b il i t y_ t y pe " : " Code Injection " ,
" attack_vector " : " HTTP " ,
" v ul ne ra bl e_p ar am s " : [ " template " , " userInput " ] ,
" key_apis " : [ " eval " , " Function " ] ,
" entry_points " : [ " / api / render " , " / api / compile " ] ,
" summary " : " User - controlled input flows into eval without sanitization "
}
Listing 1. InsightAgent Output
{
" file " : " src / template . js " ,
" line " : 42 ,
" endpoint " : " / api / render " ,
" parameter " : " template " ,
" payload_hint " : " $ { require ('child_process') . exec ('whoami') } " ,
" confidence " : 0.85
}
Listing 2. CodeAnalyzer Output
Fig. 2. Structured outputs from Strategic Planner agents.
steps, malicious payloads derived from the vulnerability type, and oracle configuration specifying
success criteria. This approach handles edge cases that predefined rules miss while ensuring
principled tool selection through capability-aware reasoning.
Table 1. Tool Registry with capability descriptions.
Tool Capability Primary Use Cases
node_executorExecute JavaScript locally npm vulnerabilities
docker_executorIsolated container execution Multi-language targets
semgrepSecurity-focused static analysis Vulnerability pattern detection
httpNetwork request generation API endpoint testing
tree-sitterSyntax tree analysis Function signature extraction
3.3 Tactical Executor
Determining whether a PoC successfully exploits a vulnerability remains challenging, as many
exploits produce no crashes or obvious anomalies (C2in § 2.4).Our key insight is that verification
confidence can be progressively built through multiple complementary evidence layers.
Rather than relying on single-point checks that conflate execution success with exploitation success,
we design three components that transform plans into executable PoCs and validate them through
increasingly stringent verification: from syntactic correctness to semantic alignment to behavioral
evidence to differential confirmation.
3.3.1 PoCSynthesizerAgent: Plan-Guided Code Generation.The PoCSynthesizerAgent generates
exploit code from attack plans and vulnerable source code analysis. Unlike template-based ap-
proaches that match predefined patterns, LLM-based synthesis adapts to arbitrary function signa-
tures, module structures, and vulnerability trigger conditions by understanding code semantics.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
The synthesis process begins with automatic language detection based on syntactic features
(e.g., require() for JavaScript, def for Python). The agent then analyzes vulnerable function
behavior to understand whether it executes commands, validates strings, or writes files.This
analysis prevents common mistakes like attempting command injection against functions
performing only string validation.The agent constructs payloads tailored to vulnerability types:
shell metacharacters with observable side effects for command injection, __proto__ manipulation
for prototype pollution, ../ sequences for path traversal. Generated PoCs embed predefined success
markers (e.g.,VULNERABILITY_TRIGGERED) that enable reliable verification.
3.3.2 ExecutorAgent: Unified Multi-Environment Execution.The ExecutorAgent provides
environment-agnostic execution through automatic backend selection. For npm vulnerabili-
ties, it uses node_executor with proper dependency resolution. For PatchEval targets, it uses
docker_executor with automatic interpreter detection and compilation support for statically-
typed languages. The executor captures artifacts including stdout, stderr, exit codes, and execution
duration. These structured results enable both verification and detailed failure diagnosis.
3.3.3 OracleEngine: Progressive Multi-Layer Verification.§ 2.4 noted that simple pattern matching
produces false positives, while LLM-based judgment is prohibitively expensive.Our key insight
is that most failures can be quickly rejected through fast checks, reserving expensive
semantic reasoning for ambiguous cases.The OracleEngine implements three progressively
stringent verification layers with confidence-driven escalation.
L1 Execution Statusperforms fast rule-based verification examining exit codes, timeout condi-
tions, and fatal error patterns (e.g., SyntaxError, ModuleNotFoundError). Scripts exhibiting these
failures are immediately rejected. Scripts completing with exit code 0 proceed to pattern matching.
L2 Pattern Matchingdetects predefined success markers (e.g.,POC_SUCCESS, EXPLOIT_SUCCESS)
and vulnerability-specific evidence patterns (e.g., file creation confirmations, unauthorized data
access). This layer provides high-confidence positive signals without LLM invocation.
L3 LLM Judgehandles ambiguous cases where pattern matching is inconclusive. The LLM
receives execution output with vulnerability context and determines whether evidence convincingly
demonstrates successful reproduction. This layered design achieves both accuracy and efficiency:
most executions are resolved by fast checks, while expensive reasoning applies only when necessary.
3.4 Adaptive Refiner
When a PoC fails, existing systems cannot distinguish whether the failure stems from fundamentally
incorrect attack strategies or merely implementation bugs (C3in § 2.4).We observe that execution
failures decompose into orthogonal dimensions requiring different remediation strategies.
The Adaptive Refiner addresses this through three mechanisms: structured feedback interpretation
diagnoses failure root causes, dual-dimension routing directs failures to appropriate correction
loops, and sparse experience indexing enables knowledge reuse without context inflation.
3.4.1 RewardShaper: Dual-Dimension Failure Diagnosis.The RewardShaper transforms execution
results into structured feedback signals that enable principled routing decisions. Rather than treating
all failures uniformly, the system decomposes execution quality along two orthogonal axes.
TheTactical Score 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 ∈ [− 1, 1] quantifies code-level correctness: syntax validity, runtime
stability, and parameter accuracy. High tactical scores indicate the code executes correctly but may
target the wrong attack vector; low scores indicate implementation bugs requiring code fixes.
TheStrategic Score 𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐 ∈ [ 0, 10] measures overall attack strategy soundness: progress
toward vulnerability reproduction and alignment with target characteristics. High strategic scores
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 9 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 9
indicate the approach is fundamentally correct but needs execution refinement. Low strategic
scores indicate the attack vector is fundamentally wrong and requires replanning.
This dual-dimension decomposition enables targeted correction:tactical issues trigger
code refinement within the current strategy, while strategic issues trigger replanning. The scoring
mechanism employs LLM-as-Judge with explicit evaluation rubrics (Table 2). This approach captures
nuanced failure modes that deterministic heuristics miss, enabling more precise diagnostic feedback.
Table 2. Dual-dimension reward criteria and routing logic.
Dimension Score Failure or Reward Mode Routing
Tactical
−1.0Fatal errors: SyntaxError, ImportError, ModuleNotFoundError Resynthesize
−0.5Runtime crashes: TypeError, ReferenceError, unhandled exceptions Refine
1.0Clean execution: exit code 0, no stderr output (Strategic)
Strategic
0–2No meaningful interaction: immediate crash, wrong target Replan
3–5Weak exploitation signals: target reached, wrong parameters Refine
6–8Strong exploitation signals: partial success, stack trace exposed Refine
10 Successful reproduction: success marker detected, vulnerability con-
firmed
Success
Based on dual-dimension scores, the RewardShaper produces preliminary routing suggestions
with four distinct outcomes:successwhen both dimensions indicate successful exploitation,resyn-
thesizewhen critical code errors require complete regeneration,refinewhen localized modifications
suffice, andreplanwhen the fundamental strategy requires revision. These correspond to the dual-
loop architecture whererefineandresynthesizetrigger theTactical Loop, whilereplantriggers the
Strategic Loop.
3.4.2 RefinerAgent: Adaptive Routing and Targeted Modification.The RefinerAgent serves as the
decision hub, validating and potentially overriding routing suggestions based on deeper failure
context analysis.For instance, repeatedrefineattempts without progress trigger escalation
toreplaneven when scores suggest otherwise, preventing infinite tactical loops.
When the routing decision isrefine, the agent performs targeted tactical modifications while
preserving the attack strategy. It classifies failure root causes into diagnostic categories (wrong_tool,
syntax_error, env_missing) and modifies payloads, parameters, or configurations accordingly.
Forresynthesizedecisions, it routes to the PoCSynthesizerAgent for complete code regeneration.
Forreplandecisions, it triggers theStrategic Loopby returning control to thePlannerAgent.
3.4.3 IndexedRewardStore: Sparse Experience Retrieval.§ 2.4 noted that naive experience injection
causes context inflation while stateless approaches repeat mistakes.Our key insight is that
most historical attempts are irrelevant to current failures, and efficient retrieval requires
indexing by failure characteristics.
The IndexedRewardStore maintains compact reward records containing iteration numbers,
dual-dimension scores, state tags, improvement hints, and metadata (error types, tools used). Each
record receives a unique identifier enabling prompts to reference past attempts through IDs rather
than embedding full content. During context construction, a two-phase retrieval strategy operates:
retrieving the 𝐾 most recent rewards for temporal continuity, and querying rewards filtered by
error type ranked by strategic score for relevant patterns. Actual content loads on demand with
in-memory caching for frequently accessed records.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
This design achieves efficient experience utilization: relevant past attempts inform current
decisions without overwhelming context, enabling the system to learn from failures while main-
taining bounded prompt sizes. The sparse indexing mechanism proves critical for handling complex
vulnerabilities requiring numerous iterative refinements.
4 Experimental Setup
4.1 Research Questions
We evaluate the effectiveness ofCve2PoCby comparing it with state-of-the-art approaches for
automated vulnerability reproduction and PoC generation. We focus on the following research
questions (RQs):
RQ1:How effective isCve2PoCcompared with existing approaches in generating executable
and verifiable vulnerability PoCs?
RQ2:What are the contributions of the three core modules,Strategic Planner,Tactical
Executor, andAdaptive Refiner, to the reproduction success rate?
RQ3:What factors affectCve2PoC’s reproduction performance across different conditions?
RQ4:How does the code quality ofCve2PoC-generated PoCs compare to human-written ground
truth PoCs?
To answer RQ1, we compare three representative baselines, including PoCGen [ 37], Open-
Hands [42], and CAI [23], all using the same backbone LLM to ensure fair comparison of system
designs. To answer RQ2, we conduct ablation studies aligned with our three-module architecture,
performing module-level ablations forStrategic PlannerandAdaptive Refiner, and mechanism-
level ablation for the Progressive Multi-Layer Oracle withinTactical Executor. To answer RQ3,
we analyze how various factors affect reproduction performance, including backbone LLM choice,
vulnerability type, CVE publication year, description length, and code complexity. To answer RQ4,
we compare the code quality ofCve2PoC-generated PoCs against human-written ground truth
PoCs from both datasets through human expert evaluation, assessing three dimensions: Readability,
Reusability, and Professionalism.
4.2 Datasets
We evaluateCve2PoCon two real-world vulnerability reproduction benchmarks that collectively
cover a wide range of vulnerability types and programming ecosystems.
SecBench.js.SecBench.js [ 3] is an executable security benchmark suite for server-side JavaScript
vulnerabilities. The original dataset contains 600 vulnerabilities covering five common vulnerability
classes in the npm ecosystem. From this dataset, we select 387 vulnerabilities that have official
CVE identifiers, ensuring well-documented vulnerability descriptions and expected exploitation
behaviors. Each entry contains a CVE identifier and detailed vulnerability description, vulnerable
npm package name and version, source code repository with commit information, executable
exploit payload, and oracle for validating successful exploitation. The selected samples span diverse
vulnerability types including Remote Code Execution, Prototype Pollution, Command Injection,
Path Traversal, and Regular Expression Denial of Service.
PatchEval.PatchEval [ 44] is a multi-language vulnerability benchmark, originally designed for
patch evaluation but equally suitable for reproduction due to its Dockerized sandbox environments
with PoC tests. The benchmark comprises 1,000 vulnerabilities sourced from CVEs reported between
2015 and 2025, covering 65 distinct CWE categories across Go, JavaScript, and Python. We use
the reproducible subset of 230 CVEs that are equipped with Dockerized sandbox environments
enabling runtime validation through both PoC tests and unit tests. Each entry contains the CVE
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 11 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 11
identifier and description, CWE information, vulnerable and fixed code snippets, patch diffs, and
test commands for reproduction.
4.3 Baselines
We compareCve2PoCagainst three representative approaches for automated vulnerability repro-
duction and PoC generation.
PoCGen[ 37] is a state-of-the-art approach for generating PoC exploits for npm package vul-
nerabilities. It combines large language models with static and dynamic analyses to extract code
evidence, generate candidate exploits, and validate whether the exploit reproduces the vulnerability.
OpenHands[ 42] is an open platform for building AI software developers as generalist agents.
We adapt OpenHands to our vulnerability reproduction task by providing CVE descriptions and
source code context, configuring it to iteratively generate and execute candidate PoCs.
CAI[ 23] is a cybersecurity-oriented agent framework designed for offensive security workflows
including reconnaissance, exploitation, and PoC generation. We configure CAI with the same
execution environment and verification interface asCve2PoCto ensure fair comparison.
4.4 Evaluation Metrics
Following previous work on automated software testing [7, 22], we employ multiple metrics to
evaluate effectiveness and efficiency.
Effectiveness Metrics.Reproduction Success Rate measures the percentage of vulnerabilities for
which the system successfully generates an executable PoC that triggers the expected vulnerability
behavior. A PoC is considered successful if it executes without errors, triggers the vulnerability
verified by our oracle, and completes within the time budget.
Efficiency Metrics.Average Execution Time measures the end-to-end time from CVE input to
final PoC generation. Token Consumption measures the total tokens processed by the backbone
LLM during the reproduction process.
4.5 Implementation Details
We implementCve2PoCin Python 3.11 and manage dependencies using Conda. All experiments
are conducted on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core i9-12900K CPU, an NVIDIA RTX
3090 GPU with 24GB memory, 32GB DDR4 RAM, and 2TB NVMe storage. To ensure safety and
reproducibility, all PoC executions are sandboxed in lightweight Docker containers with strict
resource limits and network isolation. We set a hard timeout of 600 seconds per CVE and limit the
refinement iterations to 3 strategic and 5 tactical cycles.
For RQ1 and RQ2, we use DeepSeek-V3.2 [8] as the backbone LLM for bothCve2PoCand all
baselines, ensuring fair comparison of system designs. All models are configured with temperature
0.1 and maximum token limit of 128K.
For RQ3, we conduct impact analysis using a stratified sample of 100 CVEs. We evaluate three
LLM backbones including GPT-5.2 [27] and two open-source models (Qwen3-Coder-30B [31] and
GPT-OSS-20B [28]) deployed locally using Ollama. We also analyze the impact of vulnerability
type, CVE publication year, description length, and code complexity on reproduction performance.
5 Experimental Results
This section presents our experimental results and answers the four RQs outlined in § 4.1.
5.1 RQ1: Comparison with Baselines
To answer RQ1, we compare the performance ofCve2PoCwith three state-of-the-art baselines:
PoCGen [37], OpenHands [42], and CAI [ 23]. Table 3 presents the comprehensive comparison
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
Table 3. Comprehensive comparison ofCve2PoCwith baselines on SecBench.js and PatchEval benchmarks.
RSR denotes Reproduction Success Rate. The breakdown shows performance across vulnerability types and
programming languages.
Method
SecBench.js (387 CVEs) PatchEval (230 CVEs)
Overall By Vulnerability Type (%) Overall By Language (%)
RSR (%) Tokens (M) PP CI CodeI ReDoS PT RSR (%) Tokens (M) Python Go JS
PoCGen [37] 7.8 13.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 37.5 - - - - -
OpenHands [42] 55.8 17.3 72.8 70.9 45.0 14.0 41.2 22.2 101.3 14.3 24.1 27.3
CAI [23] 71.6 96.0 74.8 84.8 55.0 50.971.233.9 98.6 25.7 16.9 59.7
Cve2PoC82.9 6.1 96.0 88.6 90.0 89.546.254.3 10.0 52.9 47.0 63.6
Note: PP = Prototype Pollution (151), CI = Command Injection (79), CodeI = Code Injection (20), ReDoS (57), PT = Path Traversal
(80), JS = JavaScript. Best results are inbold.
including overall Reproduction Success Rate, Token Consumption, and detailed breakdown by
vulnerability types and programming languages. We make four key observations from these results:
(1)Cve2PoCachieves the highest reproduction success rate across both datasets.As
shown in Table 3,Cve2PoCachieves an RSR of82.9%on SecBench.js, outperforming the best
baseline CAI by11.3%absolute improvement. On PatchEval,Cve2PoCdemonstrates strong multi-
language generalization with an RSR of54.3%, surpassing CAI by 20.4% and OpenHands by 32.1%.
PoCGen, which is specialized for npm vulnerabilities, achieves only 7.8% on SecBench.js and cannot
generalize to PatchEval at all.
(2)Cve2PoCdemonstrates superior performance across diverse vulnerability types.
Cve2PoCachieves the highest success rate in 4 out of 5 vulnerability categories on SecBench.js. For
Prototype Pollution,Cve2PoCachieves 96.0% compared to 74.8% of CAI and 72.8% of OpenHands.
For Code Injection,Cve2PoCachieves 90.0% compared to 55.0% of CAI and 45.0% of OpenHands.
For ReDoS vulnerabilities,Cve2PoCachieves 89.5% while OpenHands drops to only 14.0%. The
only category where CAI outperformsCve2PoCis Path Traversal (71.2% vs 46.2%), likely due to its
specialized security tooling.
(3)Cve2PoCexhibits robust cross-language generalization capability.On PatchEval,
Cve2PoCmaintains consistently high performance across Python, Go, and JavaScript ecosystems.
Cve2PoCachieves 52.9% on Python vulnerabilities, doubling the 25.7% of CAI and nearly quadru-
pling the 14.3% of OpenHands. For Go vulnerabilities,Cve2PoCachieves 47.0% compared to 24.1%
of OpenHands and 16.9% of CAI. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our autonomous planning
and multi-environment execution in adapting to different language ecosystems.
(4)Cve2PoCachieves higher efficiency with lower token consumption.Cve2PoCcon-
sumes only6.1M tokenson SecBench.js, which is16 × fewerthan the 96.0M tokens of CAI while
achieving higher success rate. On PatchEval,Cve2PoCuses only10.0M tokenscompared to 98.6M
of CAI and 101.3M of OpenHands, representing a10 × reduction. This efficiency stems from our
progressive multi-layer oracle that avoids expensive LLM verification when simpler checks suffice,
and our sparse experience indexing that prevents redundant context injection.
Answer to RQ1:Cve2PoCachieves 82.9% RSR on SecBench.js and 54.3% on PatchEval, outper-
forming the best baseline CAI by 11.3% and 20.4% respectively.
5.2 RQ2: Module Contribution Analysis
To answer RQ2, we conduct ablation studies aligned with our three-module architecture to investi-
gate the contribution of each module to the reproduction success rate. Following our methodology
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 13 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 13
Table 4. Ablation study results on SecBench.js (387 CVEs).
Variant RSR (%)ΔRSR Time (s) Tokens (M)
Cve2PoC(Full)82.9- 132.7 6.1
w/oStrategic Planner53.7 -29.2%46.2 2.9
w/oAdaptive Refiner59.7 -23.2% 79.2 6.1
w/o LLM Oracle 75.2 -7.7% 123.9 10.5
design, we perform module-level ablations forStrategic PlannerandAdaptive Refiner, and
mechanism-level ablation for the LLM Oracle withinTactical Executor. Table 4 presents the
ablation study results on SecBench.js.
5.2.1Strategic Planner.To investigate the impact of strategic planning, we deploy a variant
that removes theStrategic Plannermodule entirely (w/oStrategic Planner). In this variant,
the system directly generates PoC code from CVE descriptions without producing structured
vulnerability insights, code evidence, or exploitation plans. As shown in Table 4, removing the
Strategic Plannerresults in a substantial drop in RSR from 82.9% to 53.7%, representing a 29.2%
absolute decrease. Analysis of failure cases reveals a fundamental shift in failure patterns: while
the full system primarily fails due to code-level bugs that can be iteratively fixed, the ablated
variant predominantly fails due to strategy-level errors such as targeting wrong attack vectors,
misunderstanding vulnerability mechanisms, or selecting inappropriate exploitation techniques.
This demonstrates thatStrategic Planneris the most critical module because it provides high-
level vulnerability semantics understanding, structured attack strategies, and concrete exploitation
blueprints that guide downstream code generation. Without these strategic foundations, the system
cannot effectively navigate the complex search space of vulnerability reproduction.
5.2.2Adaptive Refiner.To explore the impact of adaptive refinement and memory mechanisms,
we deploy a variant that removes theAdaptive Refinermodule (w/oAdaptive Refiner). In this
variant, the system uses fixed-iteration naive retry without reward-driven routing, dual-dimension
scoring, or sparse experience indexing. As shown in Table 4, the variant withoutAdaptive Refiner
experiences a 23.2% decrease in RSR, dropping from 82.9% to 59.7%. Failure analysis reveals that this
variant frequently becomes trapped in ineffective debugging loops, repeatedly attempting similar
fixes for fundamentally flawed strategies. TheAdaptive Refineris essential because it maintains
historical execution trajectories with bothTactical Score(code-level feedback) andStrategic Score
(exploitation-level feedback), enabling the system to distinguish between fixable code errors and
fundamental strategy failures. This dual-dimension feedback mechanism guides intelligent routing
decisions between local refinement and global replanning.
5.2.3 LLM Oracle.To evaluate the contribution of LLM-based verification within theTactical
Executor, we deploy a variant that uses only static keyword matching for success verification (w/o
LLM Oracle). As shown in Table 4, removing the LLM Oracle results in a 7.7% decrease in RSR, from
82.9% to 75.2%, and notably consumes 1.7× more tokens. This demonstrates that static verification
performs worse while costing more. The underlying reason is that static keyword matching cannot
accurately interpret diverse execution outputs across different vulnerability types. Without the LLM
Oracle’s contextual understanding, the system frequently misclassifies successful reproductions as
failures or vice versa, leading to unnecessary retry iterations and wasted computational resources. In
contrast, the LLM Oracle dynamically adapts its judgment criteria based on the specific vulnerability
context, providing accurate feedback signals that enable efficient convergence.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 14 ---
14 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
Answer to RQ2:All three modules are essential, withStrategic Plannercontributing most
(29.2%) andAdaptive Refinerenabling feedback routing (23.2%).
5.3 RQ3: Impact Analysis
To answer RQ3, we conduct an impact analysis examining how various factors affectCve2PoC’s
reproduction performance. We investigate five key dimensions: backbone LLM choice, vulner-
ability type, CVE publication year, description length, and code complexity. We compare three
backbone configurations: GPT-5.2 [27] as a cloud-based commercial model, Qwen3-Coder-30B [31]
(code-specialized), and GPT-OSS-20B [28] (general-purpose) deployed locally. All experiments are
conducted on a stratified sample of 100 CVEs from SecBench.js (20 per vulnerability type) with
identical system configurations.
5.3.1 Overall Performance.GPT-5.2 achieves the highest RSR of 77.0%, followed by Qwen3-Coder-
30B at 68.0% and GPT-OSS-20B at 66.0%. This demonstrates thatCve2PoC’s dual-loop architecture
exhibits robust cross-backbone generalization, with open-source models reaching 88.3% of the
cloud model’s performance, enabling practical local deployment for security-sensitive scenarios.
Notably, Qwen3-Coder-30B outperforms GPT-OSS-20B by 2%, confirming that code-specialized
training benefits PoC generation tasks. However, efficiency differs substantially: GPT-5.2 completes
in 104.5s on average, while Qwen3-Coder-30B requires 587.6s (5.6 × slower) and GPT-OSS-20B
requires 1038.5s (10×slower).
5.3.2 Performance by Vulnerability Type.As shown in Figure 3(a), distinct performance patterns
emerge across vulnerability types. For Prototype Pollution and Command Injection, all models
achieve high success rates (80-95%), with GPT-5.2 leading. Interestingly, for Code Injection, both
open-source models (90%) outperform GPT-5.2 (85%), suggesting that code-specialized training
provides advantages for certain vulnerability patterns. ReDoS exhibits the largest performance
gap: GPT-5.2 achieves 75% while GPT-OSS-20B drops to only 35%, indicating that complex regex
analysis requires stronger reasoning capabilities. Path Traversal remains challenging for all models
(35-40%), representing a common limitation that requires future improvement.
5.3.3 Impact of Task Complexity.We further analyze how CVE characteristics affect model per-
formance across three dimensions. As shown in Figure 3(b), older vulnerabilities (2017) prove
more challenging with success rates of 27-44%, while recent CVEs (2019-2021) achieve 75-100%.
This temporal effect likely reflects both evolving vulnerability patterns and training data coverage.
As shown in Figure 3(c), GPT-5.2 excels on short descriptions (<100 chars) with 100% success,
while open-source models show greater degradation as description length increases. As shown in
Figure 3(d), medium-sized codebases (500-1000 lines) yield the highest success rates, while both
very small (<200 lines) and very large (>1000 lines) codebases present challenges.
Answer to RQ3:Reproduction performance varies by LLM backbone, vulnerability type, CVE
year, and task complexity. Notably, open-source models achieve 88% of cloud performance,
demonstrating architectural robustness and enabling practical local deployment.
5.4 RQ4: Code Quality Evaluation
To answer RQ4, we compare the code quality ofCve2PoC-generated PoCs against human-written
ground truth PoCs through human expert evaluation.
Evaluation Setup.From the successful reproductions in RQ1, we randomly select 100 vulnerabili-
ties (50 from SecBench.js and 50 from PatchEval). For each vulnerability, we collect both the PoC
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 15 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 15
Code
Injection
Command
Injection
Path
Traversal
Prototype
Pollution
ReDoS
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Success Rate by Vulnerability Type
GPT-5.2 (Cloud)
GPT-OSS 20B
Qwen3-Coder 30B
(a) By Vulnerability Type
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
CVE Publication Year
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (%)
Success Rate by CVE Year
GPT-5.2 (Cloud)
GPT-OSS 20B
Qwen3-Coder 30B (b) By CVE Year
<100 100-150 150-200 200-300 >300
Description Length (chars)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100Success Rate (%)
Success Rate by Description Length
GPT-5.2 (Cloud)
GPT-OSS 20B
Qwen3-Coder 30B
(c) By Description Length
<200 200-500 500-1000 >1000
Code Length (lines)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100Success Rate (%)
Success Rate by Code Complexity
GPT-5.2 (Cloud)
GPT-OSS 20B
Qwen3-Coder 30B (d) By Code Complexity
Fig. 3. Impact analysis across different dimensions. (a) Performance varies by vulnerability type, with open-
source models surpassing cloud on Code Injection. (b) Older CVEs are harder to reproduce. (c) Shorter
descriptions favor cloud models. (d) Medium-sized codebases yield optimal results.
generated byCve2PoCand the ground truth PoC provided in the dataset, yielding 200 PoCs in
total. To eliminate potential bias from recognizing generation patterns, we mix all 200 PoCs and
randomize their presentation order.
We evaluate three dimensions of code quality using a 1-to-5 Likert scale (5 for excellent, 4 for good,
3 for acceptable, 2 for marginal, 1 for poor): (1)Readability, whether the code is well-structured
with clear variable naming and logical flow; (2)Reusability, whether the code is parameterized,
configurable, and easily adaptable for similar vulnerabilities; (3)Professionalism, whether the
code follows security research best practices with appropriate comments, error handling, and clear
exploitation logic.
We recruit three cybersecurity professionals for human evaluation: two penetration testing
engineers with five years of industry experience and one PhD student in cybersecurity with four
years of research experience. First, the three evaluators complete a pilot training session in which
they jointly discuss 10 example PoCs (which are not included in the 100 vulnerabilities used
for evaluation) to establish a shared understanding of the scoring criteria. Then, each evaluator
independently scores individual PoCs without knowing their source, ensuring absolute rather than
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 16 ---
16 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
comparative ratings. For each sample, evaluators receive: (1) the CVE description, (2) the relevant
source code of the vulnerable software, and (3) the PoC code to be evaluated.
Results.Each evaluator completes the evaluation in around 4 hours, resulting in a total of 1,800
individual ratings (3 evaluators × 200 PoCs × 3 dimensions). For each PoC, we compute the score of
each dimension by averaging across all three evaluators. Since each dataset contains 50 CVEs with
two PoCs per CVE (one ground truth and one generated), the final score for each dataset-source
combination is computed by averaging across the corresponding 50 PoCs. Table 5 presents the
human evaluation results.
On SecBench.js,Cve2PoC-generated PoCs achieve higher average scores than ground truth
(3.91 vs 3.60). The improvement is most pronounced in Reusability, whereCve2PoCscores 3.87
compared to 3.21 for ground truth, representing a 20.6% improvement. This is because generated
PoCs tend to be more parameterized and configurable. On PatchEval,Cve2PoCalso achieves higher
average scores than ground truth (3.86 vs 3.75). The advantage is primarily in Readability (3.96 vs
3.74) and Reusability (3.76 vs 3.38), while ground truth maintains a slight edge in Professionalism
(4.12 vs 3.85) due to more sophisticated error handling and domain-specific edge case coverage.
Notably,Cve2PoCoutperforms ground truth in Readability across both datasets, with 14.6%
improvement on SecBench.js (4.15 vs 3.62) and 5.9% on PatchEval (3.96 vs 3.74), indicating that
LLM-generated code tends to have cleaner structure and more consistent naming conventions.
Table 5. Code quality comparison betweenCve2PoC-generated and ground truth PoCs. All scores are on a
1-5 Likert scale based on human expert evaluation.
Dataset Source Read. Reus. Prof. Avg.
SecBench.js Ground Truth 3.62 3.213.983.60
Cve2PoC4.15 3.873.723.91
PatchEval Ground Truth 3.74 3.384.123.75
Cve2PoC3.96 3.763.853.86
Answer to RQ4:Cve2PoC-generated PoCs achieve comparable code quality to human-written
ground truth, with consistent advantages in Readability and Reusability.
6 Discussion
6.1 Why DoesCve2PoCWork?
We attribute the effectiveness ofCve2PoCto two key mechanisms, illustrated through a represen-
tative case study.
Observation 1: Reward-driven routing enables adaptive recovery through three distinct
pathways.TheAdaptive Refineruses dual-dimension rewards (Tactical ScoreandStrategic Score)
to determine the recovery route:refinefor near-success cases,resynthesizefor code-level issues,
andreplanfor strategy-level failures.
We take CVE-2020-28273 as an example to illustrate this mechanism. This vulnerability is
a prototype pollution in the set-in npm package, where user-controlled paths can pollute
Object.prototype. As shown in Table 6, the system went through 5 iterations with all three
routing decisions before successfully reproducing the vulnerability.
In Iteration 0, the code reached the vulnerability point but the payload failed to pollute the
prototype. The highStrategic Score(8.0) indicated near-success, so the system choserefineto
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 17 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 17
Table 6. Execution trajectory for CVE-2020-28273 (Prototype Pollution inset-inpackage).
Iter State Tac. Str. Feedback Improvement Hints Route
0 partial_exec 0.0 8.0 Payload failed but reached vuln point.
Output:"pollution not achieved"
Adjust payload format.
Tryconstructor.prototypepath.
refine
1 module_error−1.00.0Cannot find module ’set-in’.
PoC cannot start.
Ensure module installed.
Check script paths.
resynth
2 no_progress 0.0 0.0 Steps skipped (KnownFailure).
Exit code: None.
Resolve env config.
Verify package path.
replan
3 no_progress 0.0 0.0 Consecutive failures detected.
System triggers fallback.
Switch to Node executor.
Use pre-configured env.
replan
4 exploited 0.8 8.0 Node execution succeeded!
Object.prototype.polluted="yes"
– success
adjust the payload format. Iteration 1 encountered a module loading error (Tactical Score=−1.0),
triggeringresynthesizeto regenerate the PoC. Iterations 2-3 showed no progress due to environment
issues, leading to consecutivereplandecisions that ultimately triggered the fallback mechanism. In
Iteration 4, the system switched to a pre-configured Node environment and successfully confirmed
the prototype pollution.
Observation 2: Sparse experience indexing reduces token consumption while maintain-
ing effectiveness.The IndexedRewardStore in § 3.4 retrieves relevant past experiences based
on vulnerability type and error patterns, injecting historical insights into the planning process to
avoid redundant exploration. Table 7 evaluates the impact of experience indexing.
Table 7. Effect of sparse experience indexing.
Configuration RSR (%) Tokens (M) Avg Iters Avg Time (s)
Cve2PoC(full) 82.9 6.1 1.8 132
w/o Experience Indexing 72.1 (−10.8) 9.9 (+62%) 2.9 (+61%) 198 (+50%)
When experience indexing is disabled, the reproduction success rate drops by 10.8% points, while
token consumption increases by 62% and average execution time increases from 132 to 198 seconds.
The average number of iterations also increases from 1.8 to 2.9, indicating that the system requires
more attempts to converge. These results demonstrate that sparse experience indexing significantly
accelerates convergence by providing relevant historical context.
6.2 Key Differences from Existing Methods
Table 8 comparesCve2PoCwith the baseline methods introduced in § 4.3.Cve2PoCis the only
method that provides strategic planning through dual-loop architecture, enabling replanning when
tactical approaches fail. It is also unique in offering dual-dimension reward signals for fine-grained
routing decisions (refine/resynthesize/replan) and sparse experience indexing that reduces token
consumption by 62% while avoiding context inflation. Additionally,Cve2PoCsupports dynamic
executor selection to handle environment-specific issues across multiple languages.
7 Threats to Validity
Baseline Selection.We compareCve2PoCagainst three baseline methods: PoCGen, CAI, and
OpenHands. PoCGen is specifically designed for npm package vulnerabilities, CAI is a security-
focused LLM agent, and OpenHands is a general-purpose software engineering agent. These
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 18 ---
18 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
Table 8. Comparison ofCve2PoCwith existing methods.
Capability PoCGen CAI OpenHandsCve2PoC
Strategic Planning× × ×✓
Code Analysis Static Limited LLM LLM
Sandbox Execution Limited Docker Docker Dynamic
Feedback Signal None Binary Binary Dual-dim
Route Decision None None None 3 routes
Experience Reuse None Context Context Sparse Index
Language Support npm Multi Multi Multi
baselines may not fully represent all existing vulnerability reproduction approaches, and future
work will extend comparisons to additional tools.
Dataset Selection.Our evaluation uses SecBench.js and PatchEval, which cover JavaScript, Python,
and Go ecosystems. The results may not fully generalize to other languages like C/C++ or Java,
which have different build systems and memory models. The reliance on existing benchmarks also
limits coverage to documented CVEs with available source code.
Metric Selection.Reproduction Success Rate measures functional correctness but does not capture
PoC quality or minimality. A generated PoC may successfully trigger the vulnerability but contain
redundant code or lack readability. While RQ4 provides additional quality evaluation, our metrics
may still not fully reflect practical usefulness in real-world security assessments.
8 Related Work
LLMs for Security.LLMs have transformed security research by enabling comprehension of
natural language vulnerability descriptions. Foundation models [12, 17, 32] and security-specific
variants [14, 18] support vulnerability classification and localization. LLM-based detection [38, 39]
and repair systems [15, 49] demonstrate semantic understanding but focus on static analysis without
execution feedback. Agent architectures [36, 41, 43, 47] enable iterative reasoning, while multi-agent
systems [20, 42, 46] and memory mechanisms [29, 50] extend these ideas to complex software tasks.
Automated PoC Generation.Several systems target PoC generation from vulnerability descrip-
tions. PoCGen [37] combines LLMs with program analysis in npm ecosystem, while CVE-GENIE [40]
coordinates multi-agent collaboration through resource gathering, environment reconstruction,
and exploit generation phases. Recent work explores multi-agent teams for complex exploits [52]
and modular LLM frameworks with analysis-generation-verification pipelines [30]. Process-based
feedback [45, 51] enables iterative refinement. OpenHands [ 42] provides an agent adaptable to
software engineering tasks, while CAI [ 23] offers security-focused tooling. However, these ap-
proaches lack structured pre-analysis, employ unreliable verification, and use flat decision-making
that conflates strategic and tactical errors [22, 36].Cve2PoCaddresses these through dual-loop
architecture with progressive verification and sparse experience indexing.
9 Conclusion
In this paper, we introducedCve2PoC, a dual-loop agent framework for automated PoC generation
from CVE descriptions.Cve2PoCconsists of three modules:Strategic Plannerfor vulnerability
analysis and attack planning,Tactical Executorfor PoC synthesis and progressive verification,
andAdaptive Refinerfor reward-driven feedback routing and sparse experience indexing. Ex-
perimental results on 617 real-world vulnerabilities demonstrate thatCve2PoCachieves 82.9%
reproduction success rate on SecBench.js and 54.3% on PatchEval, outperforming the best baseline
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 19 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 19
by 11.3% and 20.4% respectively while consuming significantly fewer tokens. Impact analysis reveals
robust performance across different LLM backbones, vulnerability types, and task complexities.
Human evaluation confirms that generated PoCs achieve comparable code quality to human-written
exploits in readability and reusability.
References
[1] Vivi Andersson, Sofia Bobadilla, Harald Hobbelhagen, and Martin Monperrus. 2025. PoCo: Agentic Proof-of-Concept
Exploit Generation for Smart Contracts. arXiv:2511.02780 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.02780
[2] Thanassis Avgerinos, Sang Kil Cha, Brent Lim Tze Hao, and David Brumley. 2011. AEG: Automatic Exploit Generation.
InProceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2011, San Diego, California, USA,
6th February - 9th February 2011. The Internet Society. https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss2011/aeg-automatic-
exploit-generation
[3] Masudul Hasan Masud Bhuiyan, Adithya Srinivas Parthasarathy, Nikos Vasilakis, Michael Pradel, and Cristian-
Alexandru Staicu. 2023. SecBench.js: An Executable Security Benchmark Suite for Server-Side JavaScript. In45th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2023, Melbourne, Australia, May 14-20, 2023. IEEE,
1059–1070. doi:10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00096
[4] Cristian Cadar, Daniel Dunbar, and Dawson R. Engler. 2008. KLEE: Unassisted and Automatic Generation of High-
Coverage Tests for Complex Systems Programs. In8th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-
mentation, OSDI 2008, December 8-10, 2008, San Diego, California, USA, Proceedings, Richard Draves and Robbert van
Renesse (Eds.). USENIX Association, 209–224. http://www.usenix.org/events/osdi08/tech/full_papers/cadar/cadar.pdf
[5] Cristiano Calcagno, Dino Distefano, Jérémy Dubreil, Dominik Gabi, Pieter Hooimeijer, Martino Luca, Peter W. O’Hearn,
Irene Papakonstantinou, Jim Purbrick, and Dulma Rodriguez. 2015. Moving Fast with Software Verification. InNASA
Formal Methods - 7th International Symposium, NFM 2015, Pasadena, CA, USA, April 27-29, 2015, Proceedings (Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 9058), Klaus Havelund, Gerard J. Holzmann, and Rajeev Joshi (Eds.). Springer, 3–11.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-17524-9_1
[6] Sang Kil Cha, Thanassis Avgerinos, Alexandre Rebert, and David Brumley. 2012. Unleashing Mayhem on Binary Code.
InIEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2012, 21-23 May 2012, San Francisco, California, USA. IEEE Computer
Society, 380–394. doi:10.1109/SP.2012.31
[7] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards,
Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf,
Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser,
Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert,
Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak,
Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan
Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie
Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021.
Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
[8] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei
Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenhao Xu, Chong Ruan, Damai
Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Erhang Li, Fangqi Zhou, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Guangbo Hao, Guanting
Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Hanwei Xu, Hao Li, Haofen Liang, Haoran Wei, Haowei Zhang, Haowen Luo, Haozhe Ji,
Honghui Ding, Hongxuan Tang, Huanqi Cao, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Zeng, Jialiang Huang, Jiashi Li, Jiaxin Xu,
Jiewen Hu, Jingchang Chen, Jingting Xiang, Jingyang Yuan, Jingyuan Cheng, Jinhua Zhu, Jun Ran, Junguang Jiang,
Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kexing Zhou, Kezhao Huang,
Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Wang, Liang Zhao, Liangsheng Yin, Lihua Guo, Lingxiao Luo, Linwang Ma,
Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, M. S. Di, M. Y Xu, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingxu Zhou,
Panpan Huang, Peixin Cong, Peiyi Wang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qingyang Li, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiling
Xu, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runqiu Yin, Runxin Xu, Ruomeng Shen, Ruoyu Zhang, S. H. Liu,
Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaofei Cai, Shaoyuan Chen, Shengding Hu, Shengyu Liu, Shiqiang
Hu, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, Songyang Zhou, Tao Ni, Tao Yun, Tian Pei,
Tian Ye, Tianyuan Yue, Wangding Zeng, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjie Pang, Wenjing Luo, Wenjun Gao, Wentao
Zhang, Xi Gao, Xiangwen Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaotao
Nie, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xingyou Li, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xu Chen, Xuecheng
Su, Xuehai Pan, Xuheng Lin, Xuwei Fu, Y. Q. Wang, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanru Ma, Yao Li, Yao Li, Yao Zhao,
Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Wang, Yi Qian, Yi Yu, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Ding, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Ying Zhou,
Yinmin Zhong, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixiao Chen, Yixuan Tan, Yixuan Wei, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yonglun Yang,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
Yongqiang Guo, Yongtong Wu, Yu Wu, Yuan Cheng, Yuan Ou, Yuanfan Xu, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuhan Wu,
Yuheng Zou, Yukun Li, Yunfan Xiong, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehua
Zhao, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng
Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhixian Huang, Zhiyu Wu, Zhuoshu Li, Zhuping Zhang, Zian Xu, Zihao Wang, Zihui
Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zilin Li, Zipeng Zhang, Ziwei Xie, Ziyi Gao, Zizheng Pan, Zongqing Yao, Bei Feng, Hui Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi
Ni, Lei Xu, Meng Li, Ning Tian, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, S. S. Li, Shuang Zhou, Tianyu Sun, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xiaojin
Shen, Xiaosha Chen, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Y. X. Zhu, Yanping Huang, Yaohui Li, Yi Zheng, Yuchen Zhu, Yunxian
Ma, Zhen Huang, Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, Dongjie Ji, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jin Chen, Leyi Xia, Miaojun
Wang, Mingming Li, Peng Zhang, Ruyi Chen, Shangmian Sun, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, T. Wang, W. L. Xiao, Wei
An, Xianzu Wang, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Ying Tang, Yukun Zha, Zekai Zhang, Zhe Ju, Zhen Zhang, and
Zihua Qu. 2025. DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the Frontier of Open Large Language Models. arXiv:2512.02556 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02556
[9] Gelei Deng, Yi Liu, Víctor Mayoral-Vilches, Peng Liu, Yuekang Li, Yuan Xu, Tianwei Zhang, Yang Liu, Martin Pinzger,
and Stefan Rass. 2024. PentestGPT: An LLM-empowered Automatic Penetration Testing Tool. arXiv:2308.06782 [cs.SE]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06782
[10] Dino Distefano, Manuel Fähndrich, Francesco Logozzo, and Peter W. O’Hearn. 2019. Scaling static analyses at Facebook.
Commun. ACM62, 8 (2019), 62–70. doi:10.1145/3338112
[11] Richard Fang, Rohan Bindu, Akul Gupta, and Daniel Kang. 2024. LLM Agents can Autonomously Exploit One-day
Vulnerabilities. arXiv:2404.08144 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.08144
[12] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu,
Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. CodeBERT: A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages.
arXiv:2002.08155 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.08155
[13] Andrea Fioraldi, Dominik Christian Maier, Heiko Eißfeldt, and Marc Heuse. 2020. AFL++ : Combining Incremental Steps
of Fuzzing Research. In14th USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies, WOOT 2020, August 11, 2020, Yuval Yarom
and Sarah Zennou (Eds.). USENIX Association. https://www.usenix.org/conference/woot20/presentation/fioraldi
[14] Michael Fu and Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn. 2022. LineVul: A Transformer-based Line-Level Vulnerability Prediction.
In2022 IEEE/ACM 19th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). 608–620. doi:10.1145/3524842.
3528452
[15] Michael Fu, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Trung Le, Van Nguyen, and Dinh Phung. 2022. VulRepair: a T5-based
automated software vulnerability repair. InProceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering(Singapore, Singapore)(ESEC/FSE 2022). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 935–947. doi:10.1145/3540250.3549098
[16] GitHub. 2019. CodeQL. https://github.com/github/codeql.
[17] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy,
Shengyu Fu, Michele Tufano, Shao Kun Deng, Colin Clement, Dawn Drain, Neel Sundaresan, Jian Yin, Daxin Jiang,
and Ming Zhou. 2021. GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training Code Representations with Data Flow. arXiv:2009.08366 [cs.SE]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.08366
[18] Hazim Hanif and Sergio Maffeis. 2022. VulBERTa: Simplified Source Code Pre-Training for Vulnerability Detection. In
2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). 1–8. doi:10.1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9892280
[19] Julius Henke. 2025. AutoPentest: Enhancing Vulnerability Management With Autonomous LLM Agents.
arXiv:2505.10321 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.10321
[20] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang,
Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2024.
MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework. InThe Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=VtmBAGCN7o
[21] He Kong, Die Hu, Jingguo Ge, Liangxiong Li, Tong Li, and Bingzhen Wu. 2025. VulnBot: Autonomous Penetration
Testing for A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework. arXiv:2501.13411 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13411
[22] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT
Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code Generation. arXiv:2305.01210 [cs.SE]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01210
[23] Víctor Mayoral-Vilches, Luis Javier Navarrete-Lozano, María Sanz-Gómez, Lidia Salas Espejo, Martiño Crespo-Álvarez,
Francisco Oca-Gonzalez, Francesco Balassone, Alfonso Glera-Picón, Unai Ayucar-Carbajo, Jon Ander Ruiz-Alcalde,
Stefan Rass, Martin Pinzger, and Endika Gil-Uriarte. 2025. CAI: An Open, Bug Bounty-Ready Cybersecurity AI.
arXiv:2504.06017 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06017
[24] Aleksandr Misonizhnik, Sergey Morozov, Yurii Kostyukov, Vladislav Kalugin, Aleksei Babushkin, Dmitry Mordvinov,
and Dmitry Ivanov. 2024. KLEEF: Symbolic Execution Engine (Competition Contribution). InFundamental Approaches
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 21 ---
A Dual-Loop Agent Framework for Automated Vulnerability Reproduction 21
to Software Engineering: 27th International Conference, FASE 2024, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences on
Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2024, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, April 6–11, 2024, Proceedings(Luxembourg
City, Luxembourg). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 314–319. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-57259-3_18
[25] Dongliang Mu, Alejandro Cuevas, Limin Yang, Hang Hu, Xinyu Xing, Bing Mao, and Gang Wang. 2018. Understanding
the reproducibility of crowd-reported security vulnerabilities. InProceedings of the 27th USENIX Conference on Security
Symposium(Baltimore, MD, USA)(SEC’18). USENIX Association, USA, 919–936.
[26] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2025. NVD Dashboard – 2025 Vulnerability Statistics. https:
//nvd.nist.gov/general/visualizations/vulnerability-visualizations.
[27] OpenAI. 2025. GPT-5 System Card. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/.
[28] OpenAI. 2025. GPT-OSS: Open-Weight Language Models. https://github.com/openai/gpt-oss.
[29] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2024.
MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. arXiv:2310.08560 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08560
[30] Wanzong Peng, Lin Ye, Xuetao Du, Hongli Zhang, Dongyang Zhan, Yunting Zhang, Yicheng Guo, and Chen Zhang.
2025. PwnGPT: Automatic Exploit Generation Based on Large Language Models. InProceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende,
Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria,
11481–11494. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.562
[31] Qwen Team, Alibaba Cloud. 2025. Qwen3-Coder: Code-Specialized Large Language Models. https://github.com/
QwenLM/Qwen3-Coder.
[32] Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain
Sauvestre, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin,
Nicolas Usunier, Thomas Scialom, and Gabriel Synnaeve. 2024. Code Llama: Open Foundation Models for Code.
arXiv:2308.12950 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12950
[33] Semgrep, Inc. 2020. Semgrep: Lightweight Static Analysis for Many Languages. https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep.
[34] Kosta Serebryany. 2016. Continuous Fuzzing with libFuzzer and AddressSanitizer. In2016 IEEE Cybersecurity Develop-
ment (SecDev). 157–157. doi:10.1109/SecDev.2016.043
[35] Ze Sheng, Zhicheng Chen, Shuning Gu, Heqing Huang, Guofei Gu, and Jeff Huang. 2025. LLMs in Software Security: A
Survey of Vulnerability Detection Techniques and Insights. arXiv:2502.07049 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07049
[36] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: language
agents with verbal reinforcement learning. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, Alice Oh,
Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2023/hash/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html
[37] Deniz Simsek, Aryaz Eghbali, and Michael Pradel. 2025. PoCGen: Generating Proof-of-Concept Exploits for Vulnera-
bilities in Npm Packages. arXiv:2506.04962 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.04962
[38] Yuqiang Sun, Daoyuan Wu, Yue Xue, Han Liu, Wei Ma, Lyuye Zhang, Yang Liu, and Yingjiu Li. 2025. LLM4Vuln: A
Unified Evaluation Framework for Decoupling and Enhancing LLMs’ Vulnerability Reasoning. arXiv:2401.16185 [cs.CR]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16185
[39] Yuqiang Sun, Daoyuan Wu, Yue Xue, Han Liu, Haijun Wang, Zhengzi Xu, Xiaofei Xie, and Yang Liu. 2024. GPTScan:
Detecting Logic Vulnerabilities in Smart Contracts by Combining GPT with Program Analysis. InProceedings of the
46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2024, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-20, 2024. ACM,
166:1–166:13. doi:10.1145/3597503.3639117
[40] Saad Ullah, Praneeth Balasubramanian, Wenbo Guo, Amanda Burnett, Hammond Pearce, Christopher Kruegel, Giovanni
Vigna, and Gianluca Stringhini. 2025. From CVE Entries to Verifiable Exploits: An Automated Multi-Agent Framework
for Reproducing CVEs. arXiv:2509.01835 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.01835
[41] Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim. 2023. Plan-and-Solve
Prompting: Improving Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning by Large Language Models. InProceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Anna Rogers, Jordan
Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 2609–2634.
doi:10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.147
[42] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li,
Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff,
Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, and et al. 2025. OpenHands: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as
Generalist Agents. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April
24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=OJd3ayDDoF
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.

--- PAGE 22 ---
22 Bin Liu, Yanjie Zhao, Zhenpeng Chen, Guoai Xu, and Haoyu Wang
[43] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv:2201.11903 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903
[44] Zichao Wei, Jun Zeng, Ming Wen, Zeliang Yu, Kai Cheng, Yiding Zhu, Jingyi Guo, Shiqi Zhou, Le Yin, Xiaodong Su,
and Zhechao Ma. 2025. PATCHEVAL: A New Benchmark for Evaluating LLMs on Patching Real-World Vulnerabilities.
arXiv:2511.11019 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.11019
[45] Boyang Yang, Zijian Cai, Fengling Liu, Bach Le, Lingming Zhang, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé, Yang Liu, and Haoye
Tian. 2025. A Survey of LLM-based Automated Program Repair: Taxonomies, Design Paradigms, and Applications.
arXiv:2506.23749 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23749
[46] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press.
2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. arXiv:2405.15793 [cs.SE]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793
[47] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing
Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. arXiv:2210.03629 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629
[48] Michal Zalewski. 2014. American Fuzzy Lop: A Security-Oriented Fuzzer. https://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/.
[49] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program
Improvement. 13 pages. doi:10.1145/3650212.3680384
[50] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. ExpeL: LLM Agents Are
Experiential Learners. arXiv:2308.10144 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10144
[51] Yuze Zhao, Zhenya Huang, Yixiao Ma, Rui Li, Kai Zhang, Hao Jiang, Qi Liu, Linbo Zhu, and Yu Su. 2024. RePair:
Automated Program Repair with Process-based Feedback. arXiv:2408.11296 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11296
[52] Yuxuan Zhu, Antony Kellermann, Akul Gupta, Philip Li, Richard Fang, Rohan Bindu, and Daniel Kang. 2025. Teams of
LLM Agents can Exploit Zero-Day Vulnerabilities. arXiv:2406.01637 [cs.MA] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01637
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2026.
