--- PAGE 1 ---
AgentTrace: A Structured Logging Framework for Agent System Observability
Adam AlSayyad*, Kelvin Yuxiang Huang*, Richik Pal*
University of California, Berkeley
alsayyad@berkeley.edu, yxkelvinhuang@berkeley.edu, richik.pal@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Despite the growing capabilities of autonomous agents pow-
ered by large language models (LLMs), their adoption in
high-stakes domains remains limited. A key barrier is secu-
rity: the inherently nondeterministic behavior of LLM agents
defies static auditing approaches that have historically under-
pinned software assurance. Existing security methods, such
as proxy-level input filtering and model glassboxing, fail
to provide sufficient transparency or traceability into agent
reasoning, state changes, or environmental interactions. In
this work, we introduce AgentTrace, a dynamic observabil-
ity and telemetry framework designed to fill this gap. Agent-
Trace instruments agents at runtime with minimal overhead,
capturing a rich stream of structured logs across three sur-
faces: operational, cognitive, and contextual. Unlike tradi-
tional logging systems, AgentTrace emphasizes continuous,
introspectable trace capture, designed not just for debugging
or benchmarking, but as a foundational layer for agent secu-
rity, accountability, and real-time monitoring. Our research
highlights how AgentTrace can enable more reliable agent
deployment, fine-grained risk analysis, and informed trust
calibration, thereby addressing critical concerns that have so
far limited the use of LLM agents in sensitive environments.
Introduction
The deployment of autonomous agents built on large lan-
guage models (LLMs) has shown early promise across a
wide spectrum of domains, including software engineering,
scientific analysis, and complex decision-making workflows
(7; 9). However, despite the functional competence of these
systems in isolated tasks, their adoption in safety-critical or
high-integrity environments remains severely limited. A pri-
mary constraint is the absence of structured and dynamic
observability frameworks that can account for the stochas-
tic reasoning behaviors of LLM agents and enable reliable
diagnosis, security assessment, and governance.
Conventional methods for securing AI systems, such as
static input filtering, prompt hardening, and API bound-
ary control, are insufficient for LLM-based agents that act
through long-running, multi-step reasoning cycles in open-
ended environments. These agents dynamically compose
*Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
tool invocations, retrieve external knowledge, and revise
goals during execution, producing behaviors that are diffi-
cult to trace or explain post hoc. Current security and au-
diting tools remain constrained by assumptions of determin-
ism, procedural transparency, or bounded action space, as-
sumptions that do not hold in LLM-based settings. As a
result, the dominant paradigm has centered on proxy-level
defenses (e.g., PromptArmor) and glassbox introspection of
static prompts and outputs (11). These approaches offer lim-
ited insight into agent intent, decision provenance, or oper-
ational context, especially in the presence of tool-use chain-
ing, memory operations, or multi-agent collaboration.
Crucially, the undeterministic nature of agentic reasoning
introduces a novel challenge for security and governance:
threats and failures can emerge not merely from malicious
inputs or faulty tools, but from the emergent behavior of
the agent’s cognitive trajectory. As observed in recent red-
teaming and adversarial prompting research (4; 11), even
well-scoped agents may deviate from expectations when
their reasoning states are not explicitly monitored. To ad-
dress this, a shift is required from static, perimeter-oriented
security architectures toward dynamic, semantic observabil-
ity of the agent’s internal execution process.
Our contributions are as follows. We presentAgentTrace,
a structured, schema-based logging framework that instru-
ments LLM agents at runtime without requiring code modi-
fications. We introduce a three-surface taxonomy: cognitive,
operational, and contextual, that enables multi-level intro-
spection into an agent’s reasoning, execution, and environ-
ment. Finally, we demonstrate how AgentTrace integrates
with existing telemetry infrastructures such as OpenTeleme-
try to provide scalable, real-time observability. Through this
design, AgentTrace establishes a foundation for transparent,
accountable, and reproducible agentic systems, paving the
way for future research in alignment, evaluation, and safety.
Related Work
Agent Observability and Tracing Frameworks.Re-
cent agent-oriented observability tools instrument execution
flows to support debugging and monitoring.AgentOpsin-
troduces a hierarchical span taxonomy that organizes rea-
soning, planning, workflow, task, tool, and LLM spans to
trace artifacts and processes throughout the agent lifecy-
cle (1).LADYBUGcomplements this with post-hoc de-
arXiv:2602.10133v1  [cs.SE]  7 Feb 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
bugging that combines execution tracing and LLM-aided
self-reflection (6). However, these systems primarily target
single-surfacetraces and lack a schema that unifies cogni-
tive artifacts with operational and contextual signals. In con-
trast, AgentTrace introduces aschema-based,multi-surface
observability model linkingoperational,cognitive, andcon-
textualtraces under a unified envelope, realized at runtime
via lightweight instrumentation.
System-Level Telemetry and Distributed Tracing.
System-centric approaches provide horizontal visibility into
API calls and service dependencies, often via kernel/OS
boundary tracing and OpenTelemetry-style pipelines.
AgentSight, for example, correlates LLM prompts with
kernel events using eBPF to bridge intent and execution
at system boundaries, and has been applied to boundary
tracing and anomaly detection (10). Yet these methods
are largely semantics-agnostic to agent intent and internal
reasoning, offering limitedcausallinkage between what
the agent infers and what the system executes.AgentTrace
complements them byembedding cognitive semantics into
the telemetry stream: cognitive spans arenestedwithin
operational and contextual spans and exported through stan-
dard backends, preserving interoperability while enabling
reasoning-aware, end-to-end traces.
Cognitive Interpretability and Textual Traceability.
Work on cognitive observability and agentic interpretabil-
ity models reasoning traces and human–agent alignment.
Watsonsurfaces implicit reasoning errors in LLM-powered
agents without altering agent architecture (5), while concur-
rent work frames explanation as interactive mental-model
building with LLM-driven proactive clarification (3). These
efforts enhance understanding of internal reasoning but re-
main decoupled from runtime observability and structured,
composable telemetry.AgentTracebridges this gap by
treating cognition as a first-class telemetry surface: reason-
ing steps, plans, and reflections are captured in a machine-
readable schema andcausally linkedto operational actions
and contextual I/O at runtime, enabling unified, schema-
consistent analysis across surfaces.”
Methodology
Schema
We present a principled, schema-based methodology for
capturing rich, interpretable traces of autonomous LLM-
agent behavior. At the core of our logging framework is a
formalized representation of logs as transformations of run-
time events into structured records:
L(S:E:C)→R,
where S denotes the surface (cognitive, operational, or con-
textual), E is the event content, C represents metadata con-
text, and R is a structured record that satisfies four crit-
ical properties: consistency (schema-compliant representa-
tion), causality (temporal fidelity), fidelity (faithful to the
agent’s internal and external behavior), and interoperabil-
ity (analysis-ready, framework-agnostic). This schema de-
sign builds on recent efforts in AI observability frame-
works (2) and structured introspection mechanisms for LLM
agents (5), extending them with a formal schema for high-
fidelity, surface-level trace capture. However, our schema
uniquely emphasizes semantically enriched introspection in
LLM agents, encompassing not just control flow and system
I/O, but also the agent’s cognitive deliberations and interac-
tions with external APIs and data stores.
Surface Taxonomy and Extraction Procedure
We operationalize the schema across three disjoint but
composable surfaces of agent execution, each instrumented
through techniques designed for transparent, non-intrusive
logging.
Operational Surface: Method-Level Execution
Tracing
The operational surface captures all explicit agent method
calls, argument structures, return values, and execution tim-
ing. Through Python introspection and function wrapping,
we automatically intercept all public methods on the agent
class. Each method invocation produces a pair of events
- start and complete - enriched with span-level metadata
such as argument count, result type, and execution duration.
Events are written to both structured JSONL logs and Open-
Telemetry spans, preserving trace and span relationships for
end-to-end visibility.
This approach is functionally equivalent to distributed
tracing as used in service-oriented architectures (8), but
adapted for fine-grained agent-level observability. All logs
conform to a fixed schema to enable downstream consump-
tion, and trace linkage ensures coherent propagation across
multiple layers of abstraction.
Cognitive Surface: LLM Interaction Introspection
The cognitive surface is designed to capture the internal de-
liberations of the agent’s reasoning engine, primarily inter-
actions with LLMs. These include raw prompts, comple-
tions, extracted reasoning chains (e.g., Chain-of-Thought),
and confidence estimates. When supported by the LLM API
(e.g., OpenAI or Anthropic), this surface also parses semi-
structured outputs to extract<thinking>segments, step-
by-step reasoning, and structured JSON fields such as plan
or reflection.
Span metadata is derived from instrumented LLM API
calls, and cognitive spans are nested within operational
traces to maintain full trace context.
Extraction relies on a set of generalizable strategies:
marker-based pattern detection, XML tag parsing, and JSON
field extraction. This design supports multiple reasoning
formats and enables comparative analysis across different
model outputs and prompt templates.
Contextual Surface: External System I/O
The contextual surface tracks all outbound agent inter-
actions with external systems, including HTTP APIs,
SQL/NoSQL databases, cache layers, vector stores, and file
systems. Rather than requiring agent authors to manually

--- PAGE 3 ---
Initialization/SetupConfig logger/tracerEnable TelemetryRegisterauto-instrumentation hooks
RuntimeInstrumentationBefore CallAfterCallOnError
Cognitive ExtractionCognitive Events
OperationalEventsLoggingPipelineEncodingSurface routingStreaming / Persistence
StorageFileSinks(JSONL)OpenTelemetry ExporterIndex / Retention(future)Privacy / Redaction(future)
VisualizationStep Log TimelineError Chain Graph(future)Trace Viewer (Jaeger)
DashboardReports(future)OTel Attributes on Contextual Spans
Trace/span ID generation
Figure 1:AgentTrace system flow.End-to-end runtime architecture showing initialization (logger setup, OpenTelemetry en-
ablement, and auto-instrumentation hooks), runtime instrumentation with trace/span ID generation and cognitive extraction,
logging pipeline for event encoding and routing, and downstream storage and visualization. Contextual spans are enriched with
OpenTelemetry attributes via auto-instrumentation.
log these operations, we leverage OpenTelemetry’s auto-
instrumentation capabilities to monkey-patch standard li-
braries (e.g., requests, sqlalchemy, redis) at runtime. How-
ever, we also include the option for manual instrumentation
in order to capture more granular and cohesive log struc-
tures.
Each contextual interaction produces a span enriched with
resource-specific metadata: URLs and headers for HTTP,
query structure and row counts for SQL, and key/value op-
erations for cache or vector DBs. These events are stored ex-
clusively as OTel spans to avoid redundancy with file-based
logging. Temporal nesting under the same trace context en-
ables causal analysis across layers of computation and I/O.
This surface bridges the agent’s cognitive operations and
their environmental grounding, providing a unified view of
how internal plans translate to external effects (cf. Paxton et
al. 2023).
Unified Representation and Trace Semantics
All three surfaces emit logs that conform to a shared enve-
lope schema. Each log event includes:
• a UUID identifier
• surface type (cognitive, operational, or contextual)
• trace ID and span ID
• precise UTC timestamp
• event body (structured per surface)
Logs are stored in two complementary formats:
• JSONL files (line-delimited JSON for offline inspection,
streaming, or replay)
• OpenTelemetry spans (for real-time distributed tracing
and integration with tools like Jaeger or Tempo)
This dual-path storage ensures both low-latency local de-
bugging and scalable remote observability. Logs are append-
only and schema-validated at write time to preserve consis-
tency and support batch analytics and visualization.
Implementation
To operationalize the proposed schema, we implemented
AgentTrace as a modular runtime system that instantiates
the three observability surfaces introduced in the Methodol-
ogy section. This implementation translates the theoretical
framework into concrete runtime mechanisms for capturing,
structuring, and exporting agent logs.
Overview.AgentTrace is a lightweight Python package
that (i) injects runtime instrumentation without modifying
agent code, (ii) emits schema-consistent records acrossop-
erational,cognitive, andcontextualsurfaces, and (iii) ex-
ports telemetry to an OpenTelemetry (OTel) backend for dis-
tributed tracing. Our design goals are non-intrusiveness, low
overhead, and graceful degradation (i.e., falling back to local
logging when remote export fails) when external telemetry
is unavailable.
Python Module Layout and Initialization
AgentTraceexposes a minimal API:
•init(...)configures local sinks and toggles OTel ex-
port or auto-instrumentation.
•instrument agent(obj, name,
methods=None)wraps selected public callables
for runtime tracing.
•ALoggerrecords surface-specific events and optionally
exports to OTel.
Initialization loads configuration, prepares append-only
JSONL outputs, and, when enabled, activates OTel auto-
instrumentation for common I/O libraries.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Algorithm 1: AgentTrace Runtime Instrumentation Wrapper
Input: agent instanceA, namen, optional allowlistM
Output: instrumented agentA
1:foreach public methodm∈select(A,M)do
2:letf←original implementation ofm
3:define wrapperwwith preserved signature
4:functionw(x)
5:(trace id,span id)←new IDs (or propa-
gate)
6:RECORDOPERATIONAL(status=start,n, m,
args=summary(x))
7:t 0 ←now()
8:try
9:y←f(x)
10:(y, θ)←maybe extract cognitive(y)
11:ifθ̸=∅thenRECORDCOGNITIVE(θ)
12:RECORDOPERATIONAL(dur=now()−t 0,
status=complete,result=summary(y))
13:returny
14:catchexceptione
15:RECORDOPERATIONAL(status=error,
dur=now()−t0,err=repr(e))
16:rethrowe
17:end function
18:replacemonAwithw
19:end for
20:returnA
Instrumentation via Decorator Injection
AgentTrace uses a runtime observer pattern. For each target
method, it installs an in-place wrapper that:
1. emits astartevent (method name, argument summary,
timestamp),
2. records acompleteevent on success (duration, result
summary), and
3. records anerrorevent on exception while re-raising to
preserve semantics.
Wrappers preserve function signatures, and each event car-
ries a freshspan idunder a sharedtrace id. Span
nesting and context propagation enforce temporal causality
across reasoning, tool, and workflow events.
Cognitive trace extraction.When completions include
a delimited reasoning segment, AgentTrace returns the
cleaned answer and logs the segment as acognitiveevent;
otherwise, results pass through unmodified.
Log Schema and Local Sinks
All surfaces share a common envelope with
identifiers, timestamps, agent name,surface
∈ {operational,cognitive,contextual}, level,trace id,
andspan id. Surface payloads are concise:Operational
includes method, status, duration, and result summary
(optionally token or latency metadata);Cognitivestores
thought, plan, and reflection excerpts with model and
token counts;Contextualcaptures operation type, source,
query or response summaries, and provenance. Crucially,
contextual traces manage tool invocations and data access
operations (reads and writes), linking agent reasoning
with its external interactions. Operational and cognitive
events are persisted to JSONL, while contextual events are
primarily exported via OTel with optional file mirroring
for offline workflows. All records are validated at emission
time against the schema to maintain consistency.
OpenTelemetry Export and Auto-Instrumentation
When enabled, AgentTrace converts each event into an OTel
span and exports via a batch processor. Attributes are pop-
ulated defensively, i.e., with type checks and safe conver-
sions: scalars are set directly, structured values are JSON-
stringified when necessary, and unknown objects fall back to
string representations. Exporter failures gracefully degrade
to local JSONL.
Contextual I/O capture.OTel auto-instrumentation
patches common HTTP, database, and cache libraries to
emit contextual spans (URLs, queries, status, counts, laten-
cies) without manual logging. In tracing UIs (e.g., Jaeger),
method-level operational spans appear alongside contextual
spans, providing end-to-end visibility complementary to
local files.
Engineering Considerations
Non-intrusiveness.Decorators enable tracing without
changing agent logic.
Low overhead.Typical success paths emit two events per
call; export is batched asynchronously.
Robustness.Serialization and export are defensive; failures
never block execution.
Composability.A stable, analysis-ready schema supports
JSONL and OTel; contextual I/O is auto-instrumented with
optional file mirroring.
Conclusion
In this paper, we present AgentTrace, a research frame-
work that establishes the first open standard for structured
agent logging through a schema-based protocol spanning
cognitive, operational, and contextual traces. By transform-
ing logging into a semantically rich, introspectable substrate,
AgentTrace elevates observability from an engineering util-
ity to a core enabler of agent safety, reproducibility, and ac-
countability. This design closes critical gaps in existing ob-
servability systems by enabling fine-grained debugging, reli-
able failure attribution, and transparent governance of LLM-
based agents.
Looking ahead, the structured and interpretable traces
generated by AgentTrace pave the way for security and eval-
uation research. They allow for dynamic threat modeling,
real-time risk detection, and post-hoc forensic analysis of
adversarial or misaligned behaviors. Beyond security, these
logs provide the groundwork for agent evaluation, enabling
new metrics for reasoning stability, goal fidelity, and cross-
agent behavioral benchmarking.

--- PAGE 5 ---
References
[1] Dong, L.; Lu, Q.; and Zhu, L. 2024. AgentOps: En-
abling Observability of LLM Agents.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.05285.
[2] Goyal, S.; Hira, M.; Mishra, S.; Goyal, S.; Goel, A.;
Dadu, N.; DB, K.; Mehta, S.; and Madaan, N. 2024.
LLMGuard: Guarding Against Unsafe LLM Behavior.
InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI-24), 23790–23792. Demonstration
Track.
[3] Kim, B.; Hewitt, J.; Nanda, N.; Fiedel, N.; and Tafjord,
O. 2025. Because we have LLMs, we Can and Should
Pursue Agentic Interpretability.
[4] Liu, Y .; Lo, S.; Lu, Q.; Zhu, L.; Zhao, D.; Xu, X.;
Harrer, S.; and Whittle, J. 2024. Agent Design Pat-
tern Catalogue: A Collection of Architectural Patterns
for Foundation Model Based Agents.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.10467.
[5] Rombaut, B.; Masoumzadeh, S.; Vasilevski, K.; Lin,
D.; and Hassan, A. E. 2024. Watson: A Cognitive
Observability Framework for the Reasoning of LLM-
Powered Agents.
[6] Rorseth, J.; Godfrey, P.; Golab, L.; Srivastava, D.; and
Szlichta, J. 2025. LADYBUG: an LLM Agent De-
BUGger for data-driven applications. InProceed-
ings of the 28th International Conference on Extending
Database Technology (EDBT), 1082–1085. Demon-
stration Paper.
[7] Schick, T.; Dwivedi-Yu, J.; Dess `ı, R.; Raileanu, R.;
Lomeli, M.; Hambro, E.; Zettlemoyer, L.; Cancedda,
N.; and Scialom, T. 2023. Toolformer: Language
Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. InAd-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
(NeurIPS 2023).
[8] Sigelman, B. H.; Barroso, L. A.; Burrows, M.;
Stephenson, P.; Plakal, M.; Beaver, D.; Jaspan, S.; and
Shanbhag, C. 2010. Dapper, a Large-Scale Distributed
Systems Tracing Infrastructure. Google Technical Re-
port.
[9] Weng, L. 2023. LLM Powered Autonomous Agents.
Online blog post, https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/
2023-06-23-agent/.
[10] Zheng, Y .; Hu, Y .; Yu, T.; and Quinn, A. 2025.
AgentSight: System-Level Observability for AI Agents
Using eBPF. InProceedings of the 4th Workshop
on Practical Adoption Challenges of ML for Systems,
SOSP ’25, 110–115. ACM.
[11] Zou, A.; Wang, Z.; Carlini, N.; Nasr, M.; Kolter, J. Z.;
and Fredrikson, M. 2023. Universal and Transfer-
able Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Mod-
els.CoRRabs/2307.15043.
