--- PAGE 1 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A
Composable and Extensible Foundation for
Production Agents
Xingyao Wang,Simon Rosenberg,Juan Michelini,Calvin Smith,Hoang Tran,Engel Nyst,Rohit
Malhotra,Xuhui Zhou,Valerie Chen,Robert Brennan,Graham Neubig
{xingyao, graham}@openhands.dev
Agents are now used widely in the process of software development, but building production-ready
software engineering agents is a complex task. Deploying software agents effectively requires flexibility
in implementation and experimentation, reliable and secure execution, and interfaces for users to
interact with agents. In this paper, we present theOpenHands Software Agent SDK, a toolkit
for implementing software development agents that satisfy these desiderata. This toolkit is a complete
architectural redesign of the agent components of the popularOpenHandsframework for software
development agents, which has 64k+ GitHub stars.
To achieve flexibility, we design asimple interface for implementing agentsthat requires only a few
lines of code in the default case, but is easily extensible to more complex full-featured agents with
features such as custom tools, memory management, and more. For security and reliability, it delivers
seamless local-to-remote execution portability, integrated REST/WebSocket services. For interaction
with human users, it canconnect directly to a variety of interfaces, such as visual workspaces (VS Code,
VNC, browser), command-line interfaces, and APIs. Compared with existing SDKs from OpenAI,
Claude and Google, OpenHands uniquely integrates native sandboxed execution, lifecycle control,
model-agnostic multi-LLM routing, and built-in security analysis. Empirical results on SWE-Bench
Verified and GAIA benchmarks demonstrate strong performance. Put together, these elements allow
the OpenHands Software Agent SDK to provide a practical foundation for prototyping, unlocking new
classes of custom applications,andreliably deploying agents at scale.
Software Agent SDK:https://github.com/OpenHands/software-agent-sdk
Benchmarks:https://github.com/OpenHands/benchmarks
1 Introduction
In software engineering, AI agents have evolved from assistive tools (GitHub, 2021; Cursor Team, 2024) to
autonomous systems capable of hours-long async execution on complex tasks (e.g., Devin (Cognition AI, 2024),
Claude Code (Anthropic, 2025b), OpenHands (Wang et al., 2025)). Reliably deploying autonomous agents in
production requiressystem foundations—including durable state management, safe execution in a sandbox,
and consistent behavior across environments ranging from local to containerized cloud deployments—that
were unnecessary for earlier assistive tools that rely on largely local user-driven workflows.
OpenHands (Wang et al., 2025) demonstrated that open-source software agents can achieve broad adoption
and contributions, reaching over 64k GitHub stars and hundreds of contributors in just 18 months (Neubig,
2025). As the project scaled, the original monolithic architecture – what we refer to as OpenHands V0 –
exposed growing architectural tensions. The early design was driven by the need for fast prototyping and
iteration, combining agent logic, evaluation, and applications in a single codebase. Over time, this approach
led to rigid sandboxing assumptions, sprawling mutable configuration, and tight coupling between research
1
arXiv:2511.03690v1  [cs.SE]  5 Nov 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
S e s s i o n
I n t e g r a t i o n s
G i t h u b  A p p ,  G i t l a b  A p p ,  . . .
O p e n H a n d s  C L I
C o m m a n d - l i n e  i n t e r f a c e
O p e n H a n d s  G U I
R e a c t  F r o n t e n d
A P I  S e r v e r
H T T P  &  W e b S o c k e t
C o n v e r s a t i o n  M a n a g e r W e b S e s s i o n
A g e n t S e s s i o n
D o c k e r R u n t i m e
K u b e n e t e s R u n t i m e
( v i a  r e m o t e  A P I )
C L I R u n t i m e
( C L I - s p e c i fi c  l o c a l -
e x e c u t i o n  w / o  s a n d b o x )
L o c a l F i l e S t o r e
S 3 F i l e S t o r e  ( S a a S )
S t o r a g e
R u n t i m e  C l i e n t
( E x e c u t e  a c t i o n s  i n t o  o b s e r v a t i o n s )
A c t i o n  E x e c u t i o n  S e r v e r
( A P I  S e r v e r  f o r  a c t i o n  e x e c u t i o n )
R u n t i m e  S e r v e r
( S a n d b o x e d  C o n t a i n e r )
T o o l s V S C o d e M C PS t a r t s
E v e n t  S t r e a m
A g e n t  C o n t r o l l e r
S u b s c r i b e
S u b s c r i b e
C r e a t e  c o n t r o l l e r
A g e n t  H u b   ( A g e n t  I m p l e m e n t a t i o n s )
C o n d e n s e r L L M  R e g i s t r y
A g e n t  C o r e
P r o m p t s
L o c a l  M C P  I m p l e m e n t a t i o n
L o c a l  T o o l  I m p l e m e n t a t i o n
(a)OpenHands V0: Monolithic architecture with tightly
coupled components and a mandatory sandboxing model.
The design assumed all executions occur in a sandbox,
making later support for local execution workflows (CLI)
cumbersome — requiring special-case handling in the CLI
runtime and duplicated local implementations of MCP
and tools.
Y o u r  C u s t o m  C l i e n t
A u t o m a t i o n  &  w o r k fl o w s
O p e n H a n d s  C L I
C o m m a n d - l i n e  i n t e r f a c e
O p e n H a n d s  G U I
C o m m a n d - l i n e  i n t e r f a c e
o p e n h a n d s . s d k
C o r e  a b s t r a c t i o n s
A g e n t ,  L L M ,  T o o l ,  M C P  . . .
o p e n h a n d s . w o r k s p a c e
W o r k s p a c e  I m p l e m e n t a t i o n s
D o c k e r W o r k s p a c e ,  R e m o t e A P I W o r k s p a c e
o p e n h a n d s . a g e n t _ s e r v e r
A P I  S e r v e r  f o r  A g e n t s
F a s t A P I :  R E S T  +  W e b S o c k e t
E x t e n d s
S p a w n s  /  C o n n e c t s
o p e n h a n d s . t o o l s
T o o l  I m p l e m e n t a t i o n s
E x t e n d s
O p e n H a n d s  A p p l i c a t i o n s
O p e n H a n d s  S o f t w a r e  A g e n t  S D K
(b)OpenHands V1: Modular SDK architecture with
four decoupled packages. Applications consume software
agent SDK; tool and workspace packages extend sdk’s
abstraction with actual implementations; the workspace
package spawns and connects toagent server.
Figure 1Architecture Evolution from OpenHands V0 to V1. V0’s monolithic, sandbox-centric design tightly
coupled components and required duplicated local implementations. V1 refactors this into a modular SDK with clear
boundaries, opt-in sandboxing, and reusable agent, tool, and workspace packages. The color of each component in V0
roughly corresponds to its modular counterpart in V1.
and production, eventually making a full architectural redesign unavoidable.
Guided by these lessons,OpenHands V1introduces a new architecture grounded in four design principles
that directly address the limitations of V0:
• Optional isolation.The agent runs locally by default but can switch to a sandboxed environment when
additional safety or resource control is required.
• Stateless by default, one source of truth for state.All components—agents, tools, LLMs, etc—are
immutable and validated at construction, while a single conversation state object records all mutable context.
This design ensures reliable recovery of agent sessions.
• Strict separation of concerns.The agent core is decoupled from applications so that downstream systems
(CLI, Web UI, GitHub App) use it as a shared library rather than duplicating logic.
• Two-layer composability.Developers can compose independent deployment packages (SDK, Tools,
Workspace, Server) and extend the SDK safely by adding or replacing typed components such as tools or
agents.
Building on these principles, we introduceOpenHands V1, a complete software-agent ecosystem—including
CLI and GUI applications—built on a shared foundation: theOpenHands Software Agent SDK(Fig. 1b).
The SDK defines anevent-sourced state modelwith deterministic replay, animmutable configurationfor
agents, and atyped tool systemwith MCP integration. Itsworkspace abstractionenables the same agent to run
locally for prototyping or remotely in secure, containerized environments with minimal code changes. Unlike
prior library-only SDKs (Anthropic, 2025a; OpenAI, 2024), OpenHands includes abuilt-in REST/WebSocket
serverfor remote execution and asuite of interactive workspace interfaces—a browser-based VSCode IDE,
VNC desktop, and persistent Chromium browser—for human inspection and control.
We systematically compare 31 features of our SDK with those of the OpenAI Agents SDK, Claude Agent SDK,
Page 2

--- PAGE 3 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
1 from openhands.sdk importLLM, Conversation
2 from openhands.tools.preset.default importget_default_agent
3 llm = LLM(model="openhands/claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929", api_key="...")
4 agent = get_default_agent(llm=llm)
5 conversation = Conversation(agent=agent, workspace="/path/to/project")
6 conversation.send_message("Write 3 facts about this project into FACTS.txt.")
7 conversation.run()
Figure 2Minimal example of OpenHands Software Agent SDK.
and Google ADK, and find that, although 15 features are shared with at least one of them, our SDK uniquely
combines 16 additional features, including native remote execution, a production server with sandboxing,
and model-agnostic multi-LLM routing across 100+ providers. Our SDK further adds a security analyzer for
agent actions, flexible lifecycle control (pause/resume, sub-agent delegation, history restore, etc), and built-in
QA instrumentation (unit tests, LLM-based integration tests, and evaluation benchmarks) for production
reliability.
Across multiple LLM backends, our SDK achieves strong results on SWE-Bench Verified and GAIA benchmarks,
demonstrating both state-of-the-art performance and the generality of the architecture to operate consistently
across diverse model providers.
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK is fully open-sourced under the MIT License at https://github.com/
OpenHands/software-agent-sdk.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Agent Design
Modern AI agents can be viewed as systems that perceive, reason, and act within an environment to accomplish
goals over time (Russell and Norvig, 2009). In recent work (Wang et al., 2023), agent design typically centers
on these interconnected components:
• Environment and Observations.The environment defines the external context in which the agent
operates, providing structured interfaces (e.g., APIs, files, user interfaces) from which it receives observations.
These percepts—such as text, logs, or visual data—inform the agent’s situational awareness and ground its
decisions in the evolving task state.
• State and Memory.An agent’s state encodes what it currently knows about the world and itself, often
represented as a history of past interactions, retrieved information, and internal reasoning.
• Actions and Tools.Actions represent how the agent influences its environment—issuing commands,
executing code, or invoking APIs—each realized through the use of tools that implement these capabilities.
2.2 Software Agents
In software engineering contexts, these agentic components manifest concretely in systems like Open-
Hands (Wang et al., 2025), which emulate a developer’s end-to-end workflow. The environment is a sandboxed
workspace exposing a filesystem, terminal, and web interface, allowing the agent to observe program output
and test feedback. Its state and memory are represented through an event log that records commands, edits,
and results, providing persistent context across actions. The agent acts by editing files, running tests, or
invoking structured tools like web browser to interact with its environment.
Page 3

--- PAGE 4 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
3 Challenges and Design Principles
As OpenHands evolved, it has accumulated significant architectural complexity: core agent logic, multiple
CLIs, a web server for the GUI, frontend code, and diverse runtime providers (e.g., local Docker, Kubernetes
in production) all coexist in a single codebase. Much of this architecture dated back to the project’s first
weeks, before the introduction of LLM structured tool use or the Model Context Protocol (MCP; MCP Team
2025). This section revisits the key architectural tensions observed in OpenHands V0 and distills them into
four design principles guiding V1.
3.1 Universal Sandboxing vs. Local Flexibility
V0 Challenges.V0 was built on the assumption that all tool calls should run inside sandboxed Docker
containers for safety and reproducibility.
However, doing so introduced multiple layers of friction as each conversation spanned two independent
processes (agent and sandbox) with potentially divergent states. Since the sandbox for tools might crash while
the agent continued (or vice versa), leading to corrupted sessions. In multi-tenant deployments, resource-heavy
actions from one user, such as mass webpage visits generating oversized screenshots, could exhaust container
resources and crash other agents sharing the same application.
When the need arose to support local execution workflows—for example, running tools or MCP clients directly
on the host machine—we had to add exceptions and bypass layers that duplicated existing logic. As shown in
Fig. 1a, this led to redundant local versions of MCP and tool implementations, diverging from the original
sandbox-based code path. These ad hoc extensions made the architecture increasingly brittle and poorly
aligned with MCP, which assumes agents can execute actions locally with direct access to credentials, files,
and IDEs.
V1 Design Principle
Sandboxing should be opt-in, not universal.V1 unifies agent and tool execution in a single
process by default, aligning with MCP’s assumptions. When isolation is needed, the same stack can be
containerized transparently. Sandboxing becomes opt-in—preserving flexibility without sacrificing safety.
3.2 Mutable Configuration vs. Deterministic State
V0 Challenges.V0’s configuration system mixed different domains — deployment, agent behavior, LLM
routing, sandbox settings, and UI options — within overlapping layers, creating hidden dependencies and
complex override logic. The deeper issue was structural: configuration was split across multiple parallel
hierarchies (CLI/headless, Web UI, GitHub App, and SaaS), each evolving its own precedence rules and
assumptions. Different entry points were added incrementally, each patching configuration values in place,
so two runs with identical parameters could still diverge subtly. Later attempts to unify these systems only
added more override layers and inconsistencies, while the web configuration remained rigid due to its coupling
with ORM models and database schemas. These issues led to severe sprawl — 140+ fields, 15 classes, and
2.8K lines of configuration code — a brittle system where small changes often cascaded into unrelated failures.
V1 Design Principle
Stateless by Default, One Source of Truth for State.V1 treats all agents and their compo-
nents—tools, LLMs, etc—as immutable and serializable Pydantic models validated at construction.
The only mutable entity is theconversation state, which is a single, well-defined source of truth that
tracks ongoing execution. This design isolates change to one place, enabling deterministic replay, strong
consistency, and stable long-term recovery.
Page 4

--- PAGE 5 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
3.3 Monorepo vs. Modular SDK
V0 Challenges.OpenHands V0 was implemented as a single monolithic repository that combined the agent
core, evaluation suite, and applications (frontend, backend, CLI) into one codebase. This monorepo simplified
early development but gradually blurred boundaries between the agent and its downstream applications. The
same repository powered the CLI, web interface, and GitHub integrations, each introducing divergent logic
and configuration overrides. Over time, the agent core absorbed application-specific branches, benchmark
dependencies, and environment-specific hacks, making the system brittle and slow to evolve.
As OpenHands gained popularity in the academic community, many benchmarks were contributed, making
the agent more general but also introducing heavy dependencies and frequent version conflicts. These leaked
into the main application due to mono-repo design, making deployments heavyweight and fragile.
V1 Design Principle
Maintain strict separation of concerns.V1 isolates the agent core into software engineering SDK as
described in this paper. Applications integrate via SDK APIs, allowing research to evolve independently
from applications.
3.4 Monolith Logic vs. Extensible Architecture
V0 Challenges.As V0 lacked clear boundaries between the agent core and its applications, adding
new behaviors in V0 often required editing the core logic or branching for specific entry points, limiting
experimentation and maintainability. The system lacked a structured notion of composability and extensibility,
forcing ad hoc hacks for even small changes.
V1 Design Principle
Everything should be composable and safe to extend.V1 makes composability a first-class design
goal at two levels. At thedeployment level, its four modular packages—SDK, Tools, Workspace, and
Agent Server—combine flexibly to support local, hosted, or containerized execution. At thecapability
level, the SDK exposes a typed component model—tools, LLMs, contexts, etc—so developers can extend
or reconfigure agents declaratively without touching the core.
4 Architecture
OpenHands V1’s architecture emerged from both the operational challenges we encountered in V0 analyzed
in§3. OpenHands V1 is abroader ecosystemwith applications like CLI and GUI. Its foundation is the
OpenHands Software Agent SDK—a standalone developer framework comprising nine interlocking
components: Event-Sourced State Management (§4.2), LLM (§4.3), Tool System (§4.4), Agent (§4.5), Context
Window Management (§4.6), Local Conversation (§4.7), Secret Registry (§4.8), Security and Confirmation
(§4.9), and deployment architecture (§4.10) with local and remote workspace support (§4.10). This section
focuses on describing theSDK architecturerather than the full application and explains how these components
collectively support both local and production deployments.
4.1 Modular Four-Package Design
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK is organized into four Python packages that compose together based on
deployment needs. Fig. 1b shows how these packages interact:
•openhands.sdk: Core abstractions (Agent, Conversation, LLM, Tool, MCP, etc) and the event system.
•openhands.tools: Concrete tool implementations based on abstractions defined inopenhands.sdk.
Page 5

--- PAGE 6 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
•openhands.workspace: Execution environments (e.g., Docker, hosted API) that extend SDK base classes.
•openhands.agent server: A web server exposing REST/WebSocket APIs for remote execution.
The separation addresses key production concerns that slowed down development, QA, and release in
OpenHands V0: (1) sdk stays lightweight for diverse integration scenarios; (2) tools isolates slow-running
tool tests from core SDK changes, speeding up development; (3) workspace provides optional sandboxing
implementations without bloating the core; and (4) agent server offers a generic API server usable with
or without containers. This modularity enables independent testing, selective dependency management,
and incremental release cycles—critical for production deployments where monolithic repositories create QA
bottlenecks.
4.2 Event-Sourced State Management
At V1’s core lies an event-sourcing pattern treating all interactions as immutable events appended to a log.
Event Hierarchy.The event system uses a multi-level hierarchy shown in Table 1. At the base, Event
provides immutable structure (ID, timestamp, source) with type-safe serialization via discriminated unions
(Pydantic Team, 2025). LLMConvertibleEvent adds to llm message() for converting events into LLM format.
The action-observation loop uses ActionEvent for tool calls and ObservationBaseEvent subclasses for results
– all these are subclasses of LLMConvertibleEvent. Internal events (condensation, state updates, etc) inherit
directly fromEventfor bookkeeping without LLM exposure.
T able 1Event hierarchy organized by parent-child relationships. LLM-convertible events can be sent to the LLM,
while internal events handle state management and control flow.
Parent Class Child Classes & Purpose
EventBase:Immutable structure, type-safe serialization
LLM-Convertible Events (visible to LLM)
LLMConvertibleEvent MessageEvent: User/assistant text messages
,→Event ActionEvent: Agent tool calls with thought & reasoning
SystemPromptEvent: System prompt with tool schemas
CondensationSummaryEvent: Summary of forgotten events
ObservationBaseEvent: Base for tool responses
ObservationBaseEvent ObservationEvent: Successful tool execution results
,→LLMConvertibleEvent UserRejectObservation: User rejected action
AgentErrorEvent: Agent/scaffold errors
Internal Events (not visible to LLM)
Event ConversationStateUpdateEvent: State field changes
CondensationRequest: Trigger history compression
Condensation: Compression result with forgotten events
PauseEvent: User-requested pause
ConversationState: Single Source of Truth.By design, components like Agent, Tool, and LLM are
immutable and serializable—all changing variables live in ConversationState, making it theonlystateful
component. This class maintains two types of state: (1) mutable metadata fields (e.g., agent status, stats,
confirmation policy) stored directly in the Pydantic model, and (2) an append-only EventLog recording all
agent interactions. A FIFO lock ensures thread-safe updates through a two-path pattern: state-only updates
for metadata changes, and event-based updates that append to the log.
When persistence is configured, ConversationState selectively writes changes to disk. Metadata fields serialize
to a single base state.json file on each modification, while EventStore persists events as individual JSON
files to the corresponding directory. This dual-path design enables efficient incremental persistence—only new
events write to disk, avoiding rewrites of large histories. Conversations resume by loading base state.json
Page 6

--- PAGE 7 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
1 class RouterLLM(LLM):
2 llms_for_routing: dict[str, LLM] # Available models
3
4 @abstractmethod
5 defselect_llm(self, messages: list[Message]) -> str:
6 """Return key of LLM to use from llms_for_routing."""
7
8 defcompletion(
9 self, messages: list[Message], ... **kwargs,
10 ) -> LLMResponse:
11 # Select appropriate LLM
12 selected_model = self.select_llm(messages)
13 self.active_llm = self.llms_for_routing[selected_model]
14 returnself.active_llm.completion(...)
15
16 class MultimodalRouter(RouterLLM):
17 defselect_llm(self, messages: list[Message]) -> str:
18 has_images = any(m.contains_imageforminmessages)
19 return"primary"ifhas_imageselse"secondary"
20
21 # Usage: route text to cheaper model, images to multimodal model
22 router = MultimodalRouter(llms_for_routing={
23 "primary": LLM(model="claude-sonnet-4-5"),
24 "secondary": LLM(model="devstral-small")})
25 agent = Agent(llm=router, tools=tools)
Figure 3Multi-LLM routing example. Routers inherit from LLM to maintain a unified interface while delegating to
selected models.
and replaying events from the directory, with agents automatically detecting incomplete conversations and
continuing from the last processed event.
4.3 LLM Abstraction Layer
The LLM class provides a unified interface to language models. Through LiteLLM, it supports 100+ providers
with two APIs: the standard Chat Completions API for broad compatibility and the newer OpenAI Responses
API for latest reasoning models.
Native Support for Reasoning / Extended Thinking.The SDK captures and processes advanced
native reasoning fields from frontier models, such as ThinkingBlock for Anthropic’s extended thinking, and
ReasoningItemModel for OpenAI’s reasoning. The SDK supports the OpenAI Responses API transparently
for the agent, enabling client developers to use the agent with advanced reasoning models like GPT-5-Codex
that are only available on the recently released Responses API.
Built-in Support for Non-function-calling Models.For models without native function calling support,
the SDK implements a NonNativeToolCallingMixin, which converts tool schemas to text-based prompt
instructions and parses tool calls from model outputs using structured prompts and regex-based extraction.
This enables models that do not support function calling to be used for agentic tasks, dramatically expanding
the set of usable models.
Multi-LLM Routing Support.SDK features RouterLLM, a subclass of LLM that enables the agent to use
different models for different LLM requests. Custom implementations can extend RouterLLM and implement
select llm() to choose a different model based on different LLM inputs. Please refer to Fig. 3 for a
pseudo-code example.
4.4 Tool System
The V1 tool system provides a type-safe and extensible framework grounded in anAction–Execution–Observation
pattern. As illustrated in Fig. 4, tool usage follows a strict contract: the LLM proposes JSON tool calls,
which are validated and parsed into Action; these are executed and the results are returned as Observation.
Page 7

--- PAGE 8 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
This abstraction unifies how the SDK supports both custom tools and MCP tools, providing a single standard
interface for defining, invoking, and managing tools.
Action–Execution–Observation Pattern.Each tool is defined by three well-separated components:
• Action— Specifies the input schema for a tool call. LLM-generated arguments are validated against a
Pydantic model before execution, ensuring type safety and preventing malformed requests.
• Execution— Implements the tool’s actual logic via the ToolExecutor, which receives a validated Action
and performs the underlying execution.
• Observation— Captures the output of the execution, defining a structured return schema, and converting
results (or errors) into a LLM-compatible format.
1 class Schema(BaseModel):
2 @classmethod
3 defto_mcp_schema(cls) -> dict[str, Any]
4 @classmethod
5 deffrom_mcp_schema(cls: type[S], model_name: str, schema: dict[str, Any]) -> type["S"]
6
7 class Action(Schema):
8 """Tool input with schema validation."""
9 defvisualize(self) -> str # For UI display
10
11 class Observation(Schema):
12 """Tool output with LLM conversion."""
13 defto_llm_content(self) -> str # For LLM context
14
15 class ToolDefinition[ActionT, ObservationT](BaseModel):
16 action_type: type[Action]
17 observation_type: type[Observation]
18 executor: ToolExecutor
19 defto_mcp_tool(self, ...) -> dict
20 defto_openai_tool(self) -> dict # ChatCompletions API format
21 defto_responses_tool(self) -> dict # Responses API format
22
23 class ToolExecutor[ActionT, ObservationT](ABC):
24 """Executor function type for a Tool."""
25 def__call__(self, action: ActionT) -> ObservationT
Figure 4Tool system structure. Actions validate inputs, executors run logic, and observations format outputs for
LLMs.
MCP Integration.The same abstraction additionally enables seamless support for the MCP. MCP tools
are treated as first-class SDK tools: their JSON Schemas are automatically translated into Action mod-
els, and their results are surfaced as structured Observation. MCPToolDefinition extends the standard
ToolDefinition interface, while MCPToolExecutor delegates execution to FastMCP’s MCPClient, which man-
ages server communication and transport details. As a result, external MCP tools behave identically to
native tools—validated on input, type-safe at runtime, and serialized for LLM consumption—highlighting the
flexibility and extensibility of the core tool abstraction.
Tool Registry and Distributed Execution.SDK supports distributed agent architectures by decoupling
tool specificationsfromimplementationsusing a registry-based resolution mechanism. Because Python
executors are non-serializable, tools are represented as lightweight Tool specification objects containing only a
registered name and JSON-serializable parameters. Through register tool(name, ToolDefinition) , each
identifier is bound to a resolver that reconstructs the full definition—including its executor—at runtime based
on conversation context. This allows tool specs tocross process or network boundariesas pure JSON, enables
lazy instantiation with environment-specific state (e.g., workspace paths), and ensures a uniform interface for
local and remote execution.
Page 8

--- PAGE 9 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
4.5 Agent: Stateless Event Processor
The agent abstraction separatesconfigurationfromexecution state. Agents are defined as stateless, immutable
specifications, including LLM settings, tool specifications, security policies, and agent content, that can be
serialized and transmitted across process boundaries.
Event-Driven Execution.Agents execute through an event-driven loop that processes conversation state
step-by-step. Rather than directly returning results, agents emit structured events (e.g., messages, actions,
observations) through callbacks, i.e. on event(event: Event) -> None , separating event generation from
execution control. This design enables: (1)security interleaving—actions can be reviewed or blocked before
execution based on risk analysis (§4.9); (2)incremental execution—the agent advances one step at a time,
supporting pause/resume, recovery from context overflows, and condensation for long conversations; and (3)
event streaming—intermediate results (e.g., observations and reasoning traces) are emitted in real time for
UI updates and monitoring.
Customizing Agent Context with Skills and Prompts. AgentContext centralizes all inputs that shape
LLM behavior, including prefixes/suffixes for system/user messages and user-defined Skill objects. Skills can
be defined programmatically or loaded from markdown files (e.g., .openhands/skills/, or compatible formats
like .cursorrules, agents.md). Each skill may always be active ( trigger=None) to persistently augment the
system prompt, or conditionally activated via keyword matching based on user input; skills may also include
MCP tools. This design enables rich contextual and behavioral customization without modifying agent logic.
Sub-Agent Delegation.The SDK supports hierarchical agent coordination through a delegation tool that
demonstrates the extensibility of the tool abstraction. Sub-agents operate as independent conversations that
inherit the parent’s model configuration and workspace context, enabling structured parallelism and isolation
without any changes to the core SDK. The current implementation provides blocking parallel execution,
implemented as a standard tool in the openhands.tools package, where the parent agent spawns and monitors
sub-agents until all tasks complete. This pattern exemplifies how complex coordination behaviors—such as
asynchronous delegation, dynamic scheduling, or fault-tolerant recovery—can be implemented entirely as
user-defined tools, reinforcing the SDK’s design principle for extensibility that advanced agent orchestration
requires no modification to the core framework.
4.6 Context Window Management
To ensure the ever-growing history fits inside the LLM’s context, the Condenser system drops events and
replaces them with summaries whenever the history grows too large.
The results of any given condensation are stored in the event log as a CondensationEvent. Before sending
the event history to the LLM, the agentappliesthese condensation events by removing forgotten events
and inserting summaries. This strategy lets the SDK preserve the entirety of the event log, regardless of
condensation, while also keeping the condenser implementations stateless.
Condensers enable long-running conversations and, as a mechanism for constraining the tokens consumed per
step, can reduce the overall cost of a conversation. LLMSummarizingCondenser (the default condenser) has
been shown to reduce API costs by up to 2×with no degradation in agent performance (Smith, 2025).
4.7 Local Conversation
LocalConversation provides the simplest and most direct execution mode of the SDK, designed for rapid
iteration and debuggability. It runs the full agent loop—LLM calls, tool invocation, event callbacks, and
state updates—entirely in-process without network or container overhead. The core API offers intuitive
control: developers can initialize a conversation with Conversation(agent, workspace) , send inputs using
send message(), start execution via run(), pause and resume with pause() and run() respectively, inspect
Page 9

--- PAGE 10 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
results through event callbacks or direct access of .state attribute. Pausing automatically persists state and
emits aPauseEvent, allowing agents to resume from the same point later.
4.8 Secret Registry
SecretRegistry provides secure, late-bound, and remotely manageable credentials for tool execution. Each
conversation maintains its own instance, ensuring strict per-session isolation. Tools access secrets only at
execution time, and all secret values appearing in outputs are masked to prevent leakage. For example, the
Bash Tool scans commands for secret keys, exports the referenced ones as environment variables, and replaces
their occurrences in results with a constant mask ( <secret-hidden>). Secrets may be static values or callables
(e.g., token refreshers) and can originate from local stores or HTTP-based sources with secret-aware header
handling. New custom sources can be easily added to integrate with external secret stores. All secrets are
redacted during serialization and can be encrypted with a configurable cipher. They can also be updated
mid-conversation—locally or through the agent server API—supporting live rotation without restarting agents.
4.9 Security and Confirmation
AI agents can perform risky actions, making security especially important when they run on a user’s machine.
To address this, SDK treats security as a first-class concern within the agent’s control loop. Two abstractions
form the core of this design: the SecurityAnalyzer, which rates each tool call as low, medium, high, or
unknown risk, and the ConfirmationPolicy, which determines whether user approval is required before
execution based on the action’s details and assessed risk.
When approval is required, the agent pauses in a special WAITING FOR CONFIRMATION state until the user
explicitly approves or rejects the action. Upon rejection, it may retry with safer alternatives. The confirmation
policy can be updated dynamically during a session, enabling adaptive trust—such as relaxing restrictions for
safe, read-only operations like grep.
This architecture separates risk assessment from enforcement, allowing developers define customSecurityAnalyzer
and ConfirmationPolicy without touching tool executors or core logic. The SDK includes a built-in pair:
LLMSecurityAnalyzer, which appends a security risk field to tool calls, and ConfirmRisky policy, which
blocks actions exceeding a configurable risk threshold (default: high).
4.10 Deployment Architecture: Local to Remote
OpenHands Agent SDK’s key innovation is seamless transition from local prototyping to remote production
with minimal code changes. This is enabled by the agent API server and the abstraction of Conversation
andWorkspace.
Conversation Factory: Local & Remote Conversation.The Conversation class serves as a factory
entry point that abstracts over local and remote execution. When instantiated with a string path or
LocalWorkspace, it returns a LocalConversation that executes the full agent loop in-process, directly invoking
tools and updating state synchronously (§4.7). When provided a RemoteWorkspace, the same call transparently
constructs a RemoteConversation, which serializes the agent configuration and delegates execution to an
agent server over HTTP and WebSocket. Both implementations share an identical API allowing seamless
migration from local prototyping to containerized multi-user deployments without code changes. This factory
pattern encapsulates all environment-specific logic behind a unified interface, achieving the SDK’s goal of
“local-first, deploy-anywhere” development: the same agent code that runs interactively in a notebook can
scale to distributed production simply by swapping the workspace type.
Agent Server.The agent server module implements an API server for remote agent execution (Fig. 6). It
exposes REST endpoints for conversation control (e.g., POST /conversations , GET /conversations/id ) and
Page 10

--- PAGE 11 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
1 --- local.py
2 +++ remote.py
3 @@
4 from openhands.sdk import LLM, Conversation
5 from openhands.sdk.preset.default import get_default_agent
6 llm = LLM(model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4.1", ...)
7 agent = get_default_agent(llm=llm)
8 -conversation = Conversation(agent=agent)
9 -conversation.send_message("Create hello.py")
10 -conversation.run()
11 +from openhands.workspace import DockerWorkspace
12 +with DockerWorkspace(...) as workspace:
13 + conversation = Conversation(agent=agent, workspace=workspace)
14 + conversation.send_message("Create hello.py")
15 + conversation.run()
Figure 5Local-to-remote transition requires only importing and instantiating DockerWorkspace. All other code
(agent configuration, LLM setup, message handling) remains unchanged.
WebSocket for event streaming. When aRemoteConversation starts, it serializes agent configuration—including
LLM settings, tools, and context—into JSON and submits it to /conversations. The server reconstructs the
agent, launches a local execution loop, and streams structured events back in real time, enabling responsive
UIs without polling overhead.
RemoteConversation
(Client)
Agent
Server
Local
Conversation
Agent +
Tools
Container
HTTP/WS spawns executes
Figure 6Agent server architecture. Client serializes agent configuration via HTTP; the server executes using SDK
components inside the container and streams events via WebSocket.
To support scalable and isolated execution, we provide official Docker images that bundle the full agent-server
stack—including the API server, VSCode Web, VNC desktop, and Chromium browser. Each agent instance
runs in an independent container with a dedicated file system, environment, and resource. This containerized
design simplifies deployment and enables SaaS-style multi-tenancy while preserving workspace isolation.
Workspace.The BaseWorkspace abstract class enables sandboxes for agents.Local Workspaceexecutes
in-process against the host filesystem and shell; it is effectively a thin, no-op wrapper that forwards file/com-
mand/git operations directly, enabling fast prototyping without network hops.Remote Workspacepreserves
the same interface but delegates all operations over HTTP to an Agent Server (see Fig. 7), with concrete spon-
sors including a containerized server ( DockerWorkspace) or a API-managed runtime ( APIRemoteWorkspace).
The factory Workspace(. . . ) resolves to local when only working dir is provided and to remote when
host/runtime parameters are present, ensuring the agent code remains unchanged across environments.
5 Reliability and Evaluation
We assess the reliability and performance of the OpenHands Agent SDK through two complementary processes:
continuous testing and benchmark evaluation. The continuous testing pipeline combines both programmatic
and LLM-based tests and runs automatically on every pull request and once per day. It checks that the
SDK behaves consistently across multiple language models, catching regressions in reasoning, tool use, and
state management early. These automated tests cost only$0.5–$3 per full run and complete in less than 5
minutes. In parallel, benchmark evaluations measure the SDK’s overall capabilities on standardized agentic
tasks, providing a broader view of model quality and system performance.
Page 11

--- PAGE 12 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
1 class BaseWorkspace(ABC):
2 def__enter__(self) -> "BaseWorkspace"
3 def__exit__(self, exc_type: Any, exc_val: Any, exc_tb: Any) ->None
4 defexecute_command(self, command: str) -> CommandOutput:
5 """Run shell command in workspace environment."""
6 deffile_upload(self, path: str, content: bytes) ->None:
7 """Write file to workspace filesystem."""
8 deffile_download(self, path: str) -> bytes:
9 """Read file from workspace filesystem."""
10
11 class LocalWorkspace(BaseWorkspace):
12 defexecute_command(self, cmd: str) -> CommandOutput:
13 returnsubprocess.run(cmd, shell=True, capture_output=True)
14
15 class RemoteWorkspace(BaseWorkspace):
16 defexecute_command(self, cmd: str) -> CommandOutput:
17 returnself._api_client.post("/execute", json={"command": cmd})
18
19 # Workspace factor class
20 class Workspace:
21 def__new__(cls, *, host=None, working_dir="workspace/project", api_key=None):
22 ifhostisprovided:
23 returnRemoteWorkspace(working_dir, host, api_key)
24 else:
25 returnLocalWorkspace(working_dir)
Figure 7Workspace interface. Implementations handle environment details.
1 class BaseIntegrationTest(ABC):
2 defsetup(self): """Prepare test environment"""
3 deftools(self) -> list[Tool]: """Agent capabilities"""
4
5 defverify_result(self) -> bool: """Check success"""
6 defrun(self, instruction: str) -> bool:
7 self.setup()
8 conversation = Conversation(Agent(llm, self.tools), workspace)
9 conversation.send_message(instruction)
10 conversation.run()
11 returnself.verify_result()
Figure 8Integration test framework. Subclasses implement setup(), tools, and verify result() for specific scenarios.
5.1 Continuous Quality Assurance
The SDK employs a three-tier testing strategy that balances coverage, cost, and depth:
• Programmatic Tests— Run on every commit. These tests mock llm calls and verify core logic, data flow,
and API contracts within seconds. Mocking allows quicker feedback, ensuring that most regressions are
caught before any external API calls are made.
• LLM-based Tests— Include both integration and example tests (see below). Executed daily and on-
demand for pull requests. These tests use real models (Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT-5 Mini, DeepSeek Chat) to
validate reasoning, tool invocation, and environment stability. Each run costs$0.5–$3 and completes in less
than 5 minutes.
• Benchmark Evaluation— On-demand, high-cost evaluations ($100–1000, hours per run) that measure
comprehensive agent capabilities on academic datasets.
Integration testscover multiple scenario-based workflows (e.g., file manipulation, command execution,
git operations, and browsing), whileexample testsperiodically run all SDK examples (custom tools,
MCP integration, persistence, async execution, routing, etc) to ensure end-to-end reliability. The suite is
continuously expanded as new agent behaviors and failure patterns are discovered, improving coverage and
regression sensitivity over time. On-demand execution for these LLM-based tests further optimizes CI/CD
cost: integration tests target high-risk changes, example tests cover user-facing modules, and daily runs track
regressions across overall codebase updates.
Page 12

--- PAGE 13 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
5.2 Benchmarks
The SDK offers built-in support for a diverse range of academic benchmarks evaluating agentic capability.
Benchmark Model Performance
SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024)
Claude Sonnet 4.5 72.8%
Claude Sonnet 4 68.0%
GPT-5 (reasoning=high) 68.8%
Qwen3 Coder 480B A35B 65.2%
GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023a)
Claude Sonnet 4 57.6%
Claude Sonnet 4.5 67.9%
GPT-5 (reasoning=high) 62.4%
Qwen3 Coder 480B A35B 41.2%
T able 2Benchmark performance of OpenHands Software Agent SDK. Evaluations were performed at commit 54c5858
of the SDK and commit88f1d80of the benchmarks.
As shown in Tab. 2, the SDK demonstrates competitive performance on software engineering and general
agent benchmarks.
On SWE-Bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024) that measures an agent’s ability in software engineering tasks,
SDK achieves 72% resolution rate using Claude Sonnet 4.5 with extended thinking; On the GAIA (val set,
Mialon et al. (2023b)) that measuresan agent’s generic computer task-solving capability, SDK achieves 67.9%
accuracy with Claude Sonnet 4.5, demonstrating effective multi-step reasoning and tool use. Additionally,
Qwen3 Coder 480B (Yang et al., 2025), a strong open model for coding, also stays at a competitive score
of 41.21%. These results are slightly better than those of OpenHands-Versa (Soni et al., 2025), validating
that the SDK’s architecture does not sacrifice agentic capability and maintains performance competitive with
research-focused systems.
6 Related Work
Recent agent SDKs share common goals of tool orchestration, state management, and production deployment.
General-purpose frameworks such as LangChain and LangGraph focus on compositional pipelines and stateful
graph execution with durable checkpoints for long-running reasoning workflows (LangChain, 2025; Team, 2025).
Provider SDKs from OpenAI and Anthropic emphasize production orchestration, guardrails, and handoffs
within their own model ecosystems (OpenAI, 2025; Anthropic, 2025a), while Google’s Agent Development Kit
(ADK) targets model-agnostic agents integrated with Vertex AI for managed deployment (Google, 2025).
In contrast, theOpenHands Software Agent SDKis a fully open-source, vendor-agnostic platform purpose-built
forsoftware engineering agents. It couples an event-sourced state model and immutable configuration with
sandboxed execution, a built-in REST/WebSocket server, and workspace-level remote interfaces (VS Code,
VNC, browser). These design choices enable reproducible, deterministic execution and seamless transition from
local prototyping to production-scale deployments—capabilities not addressed by existing general-purpose
SDKs. A feature-level comparison with major agent SDKs is provided in Tab. 3.
7 Conclusion
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK bridges the gap between rapid local prototyping and production
deployment for software engineering agents through a stateless, event-sourced, and composable architecture
spanning four packages (SDK, Tools, Workspace, Server). From our experience scaling OpenHands from
research prototype to production system, we learned that strict separation between core agent logic and
Page 13

--- PAGE 14 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
OpenAI
Agents SDK
Claude
Agent SDK
Google Agent
Development Kit
OpenHands
Software Agent SDK
Standalone SDK Features
MCP Support ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Custom Tools ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
History Persistence & Restore ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Sub-agent Delegation ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Model Agnostic (100+ LLMs) ✓ × ✓ ✓
Multi-LLM Routing × × × ✓
Conversation Cost & Token Tracking ✓ ✓ × ✓
Pause/Resume Agent Execution ✓ × × ✓
Native Support for Non-function-calling models × × × ✓
Security Analyzer for Agent Action × × ✓ ✓
Action Confirmation Policies ∼ × ∼ ✓
Context Files (e.g., repo.md, AGENTS.md) × ✓ × ✓
Agent Skills × ✓ × ✓
Context Condensation × ✓ × ✓
TODO List Planner × ✓ × ✓
Tmux-based Interactive Bash Terminal × × × ✓
Auto-Generated Conversation Titles × × × ✓
Secrets Management with Auto-Masking × × × ✓
Agent Stuck Detection × × × ✓
Long-term Memory across Sessions × × ✓ ×
Production Server Features
Builtin REST+WebSocket Server × × × ✓
Session-Based Authentication × × × ✓
Builtin Remote Agent Execution × × × ✓
Agent Environment Sandboxing × × ∼ ✓
VNC Desktop for Agent Workspace × × × ✓
VSCode Web for Agent Workspace × × × ✓
Builtin Chromium Browser for Agent × × × ✓
Continous Quality Assurance
Programmatic tests ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Strong Type Checking ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Frequent LLM-based tests × ✓ ✓ ✓
Built-in Academic Benchmark Evaluation × × × ✓
T able 3Agent SDK features comparisons ( ✓= full support, ∼= partial, ×= absent; as of Oct 29, 2025). OpenHands
software agent SDK uniquely combines:(i)native remote execution with secure sandboxing (vs. external orchestration
for OpenAI and local-only for Claude),(ii)a built-in production server with REST+WebSocket APIs and workspace
access (vs. library-only SDKs),(iii)LLM-powered action-level security analysis (vs. manual or external guardrails),
and(iv)model-agnostic multi-LLM routing with first-class support for non-function-calling models.
applications is essential for maintainability; event-sourced state enables reproducibility and fault recovery;
immutable component design prevents configuration drift; and a unified execution model that supports both
local development and sandboxed deployment streamlines the transition from experimentation to production.
These lessons collectively shaped a system that supports reliable, extensible operation across heterogeneous
environments. Evaluation on SWE-Bench Verified and GAIA benchmarks confirms strong performance and
consistency across diverse model backends, validating the SDK as a robust foundation for both research and
industrial-scale deployment.
Page 14

--- PAGE 15 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
References
Anthropic. Claude agent sdk: Overview and python sdk. https://anthropic.mintlify.app/en/api/agent-sdk/
overview, 2025a. Accessed: 2025-10-29.
Anthropic. Claude code: An agentic coding tool that lives in your terminal, 2025b. URL https://github.com/
anthropics/claude-code. GitHub repository, accessed 2025-10-28.
BerriAI. Litellm: Call 100+ llm apis in openai format. https://github.com/BerriAI/litellm, 2024. Accessed:
2025-01-06.
Cognition AI. Devin: Ai software engineer.https://www.cognition.ai/devin, 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-06.
Cursor Team. Cursor: The ai-first code editor.https://www.cursor.com, 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-06.
GitHub. Github copilot: Your ai pair programmer. https://github.com/features/copilot, 2021. Accessed: 2025-01-06.
Google. Agent development kit (adk).https://google.github.io/adk-docs/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-29.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan.
SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? InThe Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
LangChain. Langchain: Runnables and the langchain expression language (lcel). https://api.python.langchain.com/
en/latest/core/runnables.html, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-29.
Guangya Liu. Agents.md: The readme for your ai coding agents. https://research.aimultiple.com/agents-md/,
August 2025. Accessed: 2025-01-06.
MCP Team. Model context protocol (mcp)?https://modelcontextprotocol.io, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-02.
Gr´ egoire Mialon, Cl´ ementine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: a benchmark for
general ai assistants. InThe Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a.
Gr´ egoire Mialon, Cl´ ementine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: a
benchmark for general ai assistants, 2023b. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12983.
Graham Neubig. One year of openhands: A journey of open source ai development.All Hands AI Blog, March 2025.
URLhttps://www.all-hands.dev/blog/one-year-of-openhands-a-journey-of-open-source-ai-development.
OpenAI. Openai agents sdk.https://github.com/openai/openai-agents-python, 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-06.
OpenAI. Agents sdk and guide.https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/agents, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-29.
Pydantic Team. Unions — discriminated unions. https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/unions/
#discriminated-unions, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-29.
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig.Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Prentice Hall Press, USA, 3rd edition,
2009. ISBN 0136042597.
Calvin Smith. Openhands context condensensation for more efficient ai agents.All Hands AI Blog, April 2025. URL
https://openhands.dev/blog/openhands-context-condensensation-for-more-efficient-ai-agents.
Aditya Bharat Soni, Boxuan Li, Xingyao Wang, Valerie Chen, and Graham Neubig. Coding agents with multimodal
browsing are generalist problem solvers, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2506.03011.
LangGraph Team. Langgraph documentation (durable execution, deployment, server/cloud). https://docs.langchain.
com/oss/python/langgraph/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-29.
Lei Wang, Chengbang Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao ran Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhi-Yang Chen, Jiakai Tang,
Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Ji rong Wen. A survey on large language model based
autonomous agents.ArXiv, abs/2308.11432, 2023. URLhttps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261064713.
Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li,
Page 15

--- PAGE 16 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff,
Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. Openhands:
An open platform for AI software developers as generalist agents. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=OJd3ayDDoF.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang,
Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong
Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin,
Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng
Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang
Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan,
Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.
Page 16

--- PAGE 17 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
Appendix
A SDK Feature Comparison Details
This appendix provides documentation sources and implementation details for capabilities listed in Tab. 3.
A.1 Model Context Protocol (MCP) Support
All four SDKs provide support for the Model Context Protocol (MCP Team, 2025), which standardizes how
agents interact with external tools and data sources:
OpenHands:Full MCP integration with OAuth, supporting both local and remote MCP servers. ( https:
//docs.openhands.dev/sdk/guides/mcp)
OpenAI:Native MCP support documented athttps://openai.github.io/openai-agents-python/mcp/
Claude:MCP integration guide athttps://docs.claude.com/en/api/agent-sdk/mcp
Google:MCP usage instructions athttps://google.github.io/adk-docs/mcp/
A.2 Model Agnostic Support (100+ LLMs)
OpenHands Agent SDK:Native support for 100+ LLMs via LiteLLM integration (BerriAI, 2024), enabling
seamless switching between providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, local models) without code changes.
Claude Agent SDK:Locked to Anthropic’s Claude models only. The SDK architecture is tightly coupled
to Anthropic’s API and does not support model-agnostic execution ( https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/
build-with-claude/agent-sdks).
OpenAI Agents SDK & Google ADK:Support multiple models via LiteLLM extension. While the SDKs
are designed primarily for OpenAI and Gemini models respectively, they can be extended to support other
providers through community contributions ( https://github.com/openai/openai-agents-python, https:
//google.github.io/adk-docs/agents/models/).
A.3 Multi-LLM Routing Support
OpenHands Agent SDK:Provides built-in LLM routing with MultimodalRouter and RandomRouter classes
(https://github.com/OpenHands/software-agent-sdk/tree/main/openhands-sdk/openhands/sdk/llm/router ).
Features include:
•Automatic routing between models based on content type (text vs. images)
•Cost-based routing to optimize expenditure
•Transparent fallback mechanisms
Example usage in examples/19 llm routing.py demonstrates routing between Claude Sonnet (primary) and
Mistral (secondary) based on content type.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDK & Google ADK:No built-in routing capability. Developers must manually
implement model selection logic at the application layer.
A.4 Pause/Resume Agent Execution
OpenHands Agent SDK:Built-in pause/resume mechanism with AgentExecutionStatus tracking (https://
github.com/OpenHands/software-agent-sdk/blob/main/openhands-sdk/openhands/sdk/conversation/state.
py). Features include:
Page 17

--- PAGE 18 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
•conversation.pause(): Gracefully interrupt agent execution
•conversation.resume(): Continue from last checkpoint
•Status tracking:RUNNING,PAUSED,FINISHED,ERROR
•Example:examples/09 pause example.pydemonstratesKeyboardInterrupthandling
This capability is critical for interactive applications where users may need to interrupt long-running agents,
provide additional context, or change direction mid-execution.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDK & Google ADK:No built-in pause/resume mechanism. Developers must
implement custom state management and checkpointing.
A.5 Support for Non-function-calling models
OpenHands Agent SDK:Implements automatic fallback to prompt-based function calling for models
that don’t natively support tool calling ( https://github.com/OpenHands/software-agent-sdk/blob/main/
openhands-sdk/openhands/sdk/llm/mixins/non native fc.py). This enables transparent tool use across
100+ LLMs.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDK & Google ADK:Only support models with native function calling. No
fallback mechanism for models lacking this capability.
A.6 Security Analyzer for Agent Action & Action Confirmation Policies
OpenHands Agent SDK:Implements multi-layer security where the LLM analyzes each action before
execution, assigning risk levels (LOW,MEDIUM,HIGH) based on system impact:
• Risk assessment:The LLM is prompted to include a security risk field when generating tool calls,
evaluating each proposed action (bash command, file operation, API call) by reasoning about its effects:
”This command installs packages withsudo—HIGH risk because it modifies system state.”
•Confirmation policies:Based on risk level, the system triggers appropriate workflows, such as:
–LOW: Execute immediately
–HIGH: Pause execution, request human confirmation
• Customizable policies:Developers define ConfirmationPolicy classes to match their risk tolerance (e.g.,
auto-approve in sandbox environment, require confirmation in production).
• Context-aware:The LLM has access to conversation history and can reason about cumulative risk (e.g.,
”This is the thirdrm -rfcommand in this conversation—escalating risk level”).
This approach balances safety with usability: routine operations proceed smoothly, while dangerous actions
trigger safeguards. It’s particularly valuable for production deployments where agents handle sensitive data
or have elevated privileges.
Google ADK:Even through the ADK doesn’t provide a direct implementation, primitives like plugins
and callbacks allow users to easily create LLM-based safety guardrails, in which models analyze user inputs
as well as tool input and output. ( https://google.github.io/adk-docs/safety/#callbacks-and-plugins-
for-security-guardrails)
OpenAI & Claude Agent SDKs:Neither provides automated security analysis. Developers must implement
manual guardrails by:
•Writing custom validation logic for each tool
•Hardcoding blacklists of dangerous commands (brittle, easily bypassed)
•Building separate confirmation workflows (complex, error-prone)
This places the entire security burden on application developers, who may lack expertise in adversarial
scenarios or prompt injection attacks.
Page 18

--- PAGE 19 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
A.7 Static Context Files
OpenHands:Supports AGENTS.md, repo.md files and other third party files that provide repository-wide
guidelines, coding standards, etc.
Claude:Supports CLAUDE.md files for project-specific context ( https://docs.claude.com/en/api/agent-
sdk/overview).
OpenAI Agents SDK & Google ADK:No support for static context files. Note: AGENTS.md is a feature
of OpenAI Codex (the IDE integration), not the Agents SDK (Liu, 2025).
A.8 Context Condensation
OpenHands:Automatically condenses conversation history when context windows approach limits, using
summarization to preserve critical information while reducing token count.
Claude:Offers automatic,server-sidecontext editing with configurable strategies (particularly the clear -
tool uses 20250919 and clear thinking 20251015 strategies) that remove stale tool results and thinking
blocks based on token thresholds, allowing the conversation to continue without hitting context limits.
OpenAI Agents SDK & Google ADK:No automatic context condensing feature; developers must
manually manage context window limits.
A.9 Auto-Generated Conversation Titles
OpenHands Agent SDK:Automatic conversation title generation using LLM-based summarization
of the first user message ( https://github.com/OpenHands/software-agent-sdk/blob/main/openhands-sdk/
openhands/sdk/conversation/title utils.py). Features include:
•Category detection with emojis (e.g.,ὁBbugfix,⋆features,/filedocumentation)
•Concise, descriptive titles for conversation history UIs
•Configurable max length to prevent overflow in UI elements
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDKs & Google ADK:No automatic title generation. Developers must
implement custom title extraction or use first message text verbatim.
A.10 Secrets Management with Auto-Masking
OpenHands Agent SDK:Automatic secrets management system (https://github.com/OpenHands/software-
agent-sdk/blob/main/openhands-sdk/openhands/sdk/conversation/secrets manager.py) that:
•Detects secrets in bash commands (API keys, passwords, tokens)
•Automatically injects secrets as environment variables in sandboxed execution
•Masks secret values in logs and LLM context to prevent leakage
•Supports pattern-based detection and explicit secret registration
This prevents accidental exposure of sensitive credentials in conversation history, logs, or debugging outputs.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDKs & Google ADK:No built-in secrets management. Developers must
manually implement masking and secure credential handling.
A.11 Stuck Detection
OpenHands:Implements automatic detection of pathological agent states, including:
•Infinite loops (same action repeated without progress, same agent errors)
Page 19

--- PAGE 20 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
•Redundant tool calls (querying the same information repeatedly)
When stuck behavior is detected, the system can automatically intervene by terminating execution to prevent
resource waste.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDKs & Google ADK:No stuck detection mentioned in documentation;
developers must implement custom monitoring.
A.12 Long-term Memory Across Session
Google ADK:Provides a MemoryService interface with two implementations: in-memory for prototyping
and production use with managed persistence via Vertex AI API. The service allows agents to ingest completed
sessions into long-term storage and retrieve relevant information from past conversations through search
queries, typically accessed via tool calls. (https://google.github.io/adk-docs/sessions/memory/)
A.13 Built-in REST + WebSocket Server
OpenHands:Includes a production-ready FastAPI server with both REST endpoints (for request/response
operations) and WebSocket support (for real-time streaming). This eliminates the need for developers to
build custom server infrastructure.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDK & Google ADK:Framework-only, no built-in server; developers must
build their own server layer.
A.14 Remote Execution Architecture
OpenHands Agent SDK:Provides native support for distributed deployments where agents run on client
machines while tools execute in remote sandboxed environments. This architecture enables:
• Separation of concerns:Agent logic runs locally (low latency, private), while tool execution runs remotely
(isolated, scalable)
• Resource flexibility:High-compute tools (e.g., code compilation, browser automation) run on remote
servers without client hardware constraints
•Security isolation:Untrusted code executes in remote containers, protecting client machines
•Multi-tenancy:Multiple users share remote infrastructure while maintaining workspace isolation
The implementation uses WebSocket connections for bidirectional communication between agent and remote
runtime, with automatic reconnection and state synchronization. Configuration is simple: specify remote -
runtime urland the SDK handles the rest.
OpenAI Agents SDK:Requires external Temporal workflow orchestration for production deployment (Ope-
nAI, 2024). This adds significant infrastructure complexity:
•Developers must set up and maintain Temporal servers
•Workflow definitions require learning Temporal’s API and concepts
•Integration overhead: agents, Temporal workers, and application servers must be coordinated
•No built-in solution for simple remote execution scenarios
While Temporal provides powerful orchestration capabilities (retries, workflows, versioning), this is overkill for
many use cases and creates a steep learning curve.
Claude Agent SDK & Google ADK:Supports local execution only. Agents and tools must run on the
same machine where the SDK is invoked. This limits:
•Scalability: Cannot offload computation to remote servers
•Security: All tool execution happens on the client machine
Page 20

--- PAGE 21 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
•Deployment flexibility: Cannot easily create multi-tenant services
A.15 Agent Environment Sandboxing
OpenHands:First-class Docker runtime support that isolates code execution in containers, providing:
•Complete filesystem isolation
•Network policy enforcement
•Resource limits (CPU, memory, disk)
•Easy reproducibility across environments
Google ADK: Cloud-dependent sandboxing via Agent Engine with process-level isolation and persistent
state, but requires Google Cloud project setup. ( https://google.github.io/adk-docs/tools/google-cloud/
code-exec-agent-engine/)
OpenAI & Claude Agent SDKs:No sandboxing capability; all execution occurs in the local environment,
requiring manual security measures.
A.16 Interactive Workspace Access
OpenHands Agent SDK:The production server exposes the agent’s sandbox through three mechanisms,
enabling real-time monitoring and intervention during agent execution:
1. VNC Desktop:Full desktop GUI access via VNC protocol. Users can observe the agent’s file system,
terminal sessions, and running processes in real time. Useful for debugging and understanding agent
behavior on a higher level.
2. Browser Access:Built-in Chromium browser accessible via the web UI in non-headless mode. Users can
see what the agent sees when browsing web pages, enabling debugging of web scraping or navigation tasks.
3.VSCode Web:Full VSCode editor embedded in the workspace. Users can:
•Edit files the agent is working with
•Review code changes in real time
•Intervene manually when the agent gets stuck
•Collaborate with the agent
These capabilities are essential for production debugging and human-in-the-loop workflows. They transform
agents from black boxes into observable, interactive systems.
OpenAI, Claude Agent SDK & Google ADK:None of these provides built-in workspace interaction
capabilities. Agents are opaque processes—once started, there’s no way to observe their workspace, inspect
files, or intervene without stopping execution and examining logs. This makes debugging production failures
significantly harder.
A.17 Quality Assurance Practices
The comparison table reveals significant differences in how each SDK approaches testing and quality assurance,
particularly regarding the use of real LLMs versus mocked responses in their test suites.
OpenHands Agent SDKemploys a unique dual-track testing strategy that sets it apart from other SDKs:
• Unit tests with mocked LLMs:Fast, deterministic tests for core logic, tool functions, and state
management. These run on every commit without incurring API costs.
• Integration tests with real LLMs:The SDK runs frequent integration tests against actual language
models to verify agent behavior, prompt effectiveness, and tool orchestration. These tests are strategically
scheduled (e.g., nightly builds, pre-release validation) to balance coverage with cost.
Page 21

--- PAGE 22 ---
The OpenHands Software Agent SDK: A Composable and Extensible Foundation for Production Agents
• Academic benchmark integration:OpenHands is the only SDK with built-in evaluation against
standardized benchmarks (Jimenez et al., 2024), enabling quantitative performance tracking across releases.
This provides empirical evidence of agent capabilities beyond anecdotal testing.
OpenAI Agents SDKfollows conventional software testing practices with comprehensive unit tests and
strong typing but notably lacks frequent LLM-based integration testing. Based on our analysis of their
repository1:
•Tests primarily use mocked responses to avoid API costs
•Integration tests, when present, are limited and typically run manually
•No systematic evaluation against academic benchmarks
•Relies on community feedback for real-world validation
Claude Agent SDKpresents an unusual testing approach due to its architecture (Python SDK → subprocess
→Claude Code CLI→API):
•Unit tests exist but are complicated by the subprocess communication layer
•The CLI dependency makes mocking challenging, often requiring real API calls even for basic tests
•Platform-specific issues (Windows vs. Linux) have plagued the test suite 2
•No benchmark evaluation framework
Google ADKadopts a hybrid approach with its evaluation-centric framework:
•Mock tools for deterministic component testing
•Real Gemini API calls for agent logic validation
•Structured “evalsets” for systematic performance assessment 3
•Focus on trajectory evaluation (comparing expected vs. actual tool usage sequences)
1https://github.com/openai/openai-agents-python
2See issues #208 and #39 inhttps://github.com/anthropics/claude-agent-sdk-python
3Documentation athttps://google.github.io/adk-docs/evaluation/
Page 22
