--- PAGE 1 ---
An Empirical Study of Policy-as-Code Adoption in
Open-Source Software Projects
Patrick Loic Foalem∗, Foutse Khomh, Leuson Da Silva, Ettore Merlo
aDepartment of Computer and Software Engineering, Polytechnique
Montreal, Montreal, H3T 1J4, Quebec, Canada
Abstract
Context:Policy-as-Code (PaC) has become a foundational approach for
embedding governance, compliance, and security requirements directly into
software systems. While organizations increasingly adopt PaC tools, the
software engineering community lacks an empirical understanding of how
these tools are used in real-world development practices.
Objective:This paper aims to bridge this gap by conducting the first
large-scale study of PaC usage in open-source software. Our goal is to char-
acterize how PaC tools are adopted, what purposes they serve, and what
governance activities they support across diverse software ecosystems.
Method:Weanalyzed399GitHubrepositoriesusingninewidelyadopted
PaC tools. Our mixed-methods approach combines quantitative analysis of
tool usage and project characteristics with a qualitative investigation of pol-
icy files. We further employ a Large Language Model (LLM)–assisted classi-
fication pipeline, refined through expert validation, to derive a taxonomy of
PaC usage consisting of 5 categories and 15 sub-categories.
Results:Our study reveals substantial diversity in PaC adoption. PaC
tools are frequently used in early-stage projects and are heavily oriented
toward governance, configuration control, and documentation. We also ob-
serve emerging PaC usage in MLOps pipelines and strong co-usage patterns,
such as between OPA and Gatekeeper. Our taxonomy highlights recurring
governance intents.
Conclusion:Our findings offer actionable insights for practitioners and
∗Corresponding author.
Email address:{patrick-loic.foalem, foutse.khomh,
leuson-mario-pedro.da-silva, ettore.merlo}@polymtl.ca(Patrick Loic Foalem)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier January 12, 2026
arXiv:2601.05555v1  [cs.SE]  9 Jan 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
tool developers. They highlight concrete usage patterns, emphasize actual
PaC usage, and motivate opportunities for improving tool interoperability.
This study lays the empirical foundation for future research on PaC practices
and their role in ensuring trustworthy, compliant software systems.
Keywords:Empirical, Policy as Code, PaC tools, Github repositoriy.
1. INTRODUCTION
Modern software systems operate in hyper-connected environments, con-
tinuously collecting and processing vast amounts of data. As a result, they
are increasingly exposed to security violations, data leaks, and operational
failures [1], which can lead to privacy breaches, regulatory non-compliance,
financial penalties, service interruptions, and long-term loss of trust [2]. To
address these challenges, requirements engineering and regulatory bodies
have emphasized the role of policies in ensuring security, compliance, trace-
ability, and operational governance [3]. Historically, policies were manually
enforced or hard-coded, making them difficult to evolve, audit, or verify.
With the rise of dynamic, distributed, and cloud-native systems, governance
mandates such as GDPR, HIPAA, and the EU AI Act [4] have created de-
mand for scalable, automated compliance mechanisms throughout the soft-
ware lifecycle.Policy as Code(PaC) addresses those previously mentioned
needs by encoding policies as machine-readable, version-controlled, and exe-
cutable artifacts. By embedding policy logic into infrastructure and software
pipelines, PaC enables proactive enforcement of security, compliance, and
operational rules, thereby reducing risks of misconfiguration, unauthorized
access, and regulatory violations. This approach enhances automation, trace-
ability, andintegrationwithmodernpracticessuchasDevOpsandCI/CD[5].
A growing ecosystem of PaC tools supports this paradigm, including Open
Policy Agent (OPA), Kyverno, Cloud Custodian, and HashiCorp Sentinel.
OPA is a general-purpose engine with the Rego language, often integrated
into platforms such as Kubernetes and Terraform [6], while Kyverno is a
Kubernetes-native engine that simplifies policy authoring through YAML
configurations [7]. Despite these advances, to the best of our knowledge,
there is little large-scale empirical evidence on how PaC tools are adopted
and used in open-source software (OSS). Understanding their adoption is es-
sential for identifying gaps in developer practices, guiding tool improvement,
and informing future research on policy-driven governance. As a result, this
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
paper presents the first large-scale empirical study of PaC tool adoption in
OSS. We curate a comprehensive list of tools and mine a dataset of 399
GitHub repositories that employ at least one PaC tool. Our study is driven
by the following research questions:
•RQ1: What is the popularity of different PaC tools in OSS
projects?We analyze the usage of PaC tools across OSS repositories
and find that OPA, Cloud Custodian, Kyverno, and Pulumi are the
most popular tools. While our findings can guide practitioners toward
widely adopted tools with strong community support, widely used tools
provide researchers with a baseline for studying adoption trends and
practitioners with guidance toward stable, well-supported solutions.
•RQ2: What kind of projects adopt PaC tools?Through manual
analysis, we observe that PaC tools are primarily adopted in projects,
that can be classified into categories such asdocumentation (37%),
tooling (32%), andDevOps infrastructure (17%). Wealsofindemerging
adoptioninMLOps (1%)andAI/Research (0.2%), indicatingagrowing
interest in using PaC tools to enforce governance within intelligent
systems. These findings can guide developers in understanding the
types of projects where PaC tools are commonly used, helping them
envision appropriate adoption scenarios.
•RQ3: How is PaC used in practice across different tools?We
manually inspected policy files to understand their practical purposes
and developed a structured taxonomy of PaC usage, comprising five
high-level categories:Workflow Automation,Cost Optimization,Se-
curity,Compliance, andDeployment Governance. Understanding the
purpose of usage helps practitioners in their adoption process, as they
can apply these tools for similar objectives, while also assisting tool de-
velopers in designing more effective tools that integrate most of these
use cases.
•RQ4: Are different PaC tools used together?Understanding
whether PaC tools are used in combination is essential for assessing
how organizations manage interoperability, policy consistency, and gov-
ernance complexity across their infrastructure. To explore this, we
examine co-usage patterns across projects and tools. Our analysis re-
veals that while most projects tend to adopt a single PaC tool, OPA
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
frequently appears in combination with other tools. These insights
can support practitioners in designing multi-tool adoption strategies
and guide tool builders toward improved standardization and interop-
erability support.
Paper Organization:The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 introduces key background concepts on policies in software
engineering and the PaC paradigm. Section 3 details our study methodol-
ogy. Section 4 presents our results and answers to the research questions.
Section 5 discusses the implications of our findings. In Section 6, we position
our study within the context of related work. Section 7 outlines threats to
validity. We conclude and propose future research directions in Section 8.
2. BACKGROUND
To investigate the usage of PaC tools in modern software systems, we
first clarify the core concepts and typical system architecture. In this paper,
we usePaC toolsto denote libraries or frameworks whose primary purpose
is to express and enforce policies through code-based mechanisms.
PolicyasCode(PaC).PaCspecifiesandenforcespoliciesasexecutable
rules evaluated by a dedicated policy engine. A policy is a set of conditions
governing system behavior, where the engine returns outcomes such asallow,
warn, ordeny. By exposing decisions through APIs and keeping policies sep-
arate from application code, PaC decouples governance from business logic
and enables consistent, reusable, and testable enforcement across services
and environments [8].
Figure 1 illustrates a reference PaC architecture. Policies are typically
written in declarative formats (e.g., JSON or YAML) or a domain-specific
language (Listing 1) processed by the engine. The engine consumes contex-
tual inputs (e.g., request parameters, user identity, or infrastructure meta-
data), evaluates the rules, and returns a decision with optional explanations.
This design supports multiple integration modes–embedded library, sidecar,
admission controller, or standalone service–making PaC suitable for CI/CD
pipelines and Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) workflows [8].
As an example, consider an organization that requires all AWS EC2 in-
stances provisioned via Terraform to include anEnvtag for auditing and
cost tracking. With OPA, this requirement can be expressed as a Rego rule
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
that inspects a Terraform plan and flags any instance missing the tag (List-
ing 1). The policy is evaluated using the OPA CLI (Listing 2), which loads
the policy and the plan as input and reports violations. This centralizes pol-
icy logic, ensures uniform enforcement at deploy time, and reduces manual
review effort in continuous delivery settings [8].
Listing 1OPA policy to enforceEnvtag on EC2 instances.
1packageec2
2
3deny[msg] {
4resource := input.resource_changes[_]
5resource.type == "aws_instance"
6notresource.change.after.tags.Env
7
8msg := sprintf("EC2␣instance␣%v␣is␣missing␣required␣’Env’␣
tag", [resource.address])
9}
Listing 2Evaluate the OPA deny rule for EC2.
1opa eval--data policy.rego --input plan.json "data.ec2.deny"
Infrastructure
Database
Warning
Error
Approval
Policy engine
Policy as Code (PaC)
Figure1: Policy-as-Codearchitecture: policiesareauthoredonceandenforcedconsistently
by a centralized engine across services and pipelines.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
3. STUDY DESIGN
1⃝Identifying PaC Tools from Gray Literature
To identify PaC tools suitable for our study, we performed a search on
Google 1 using the query:“(“policies as code” OR “policy as code”
OR PAC) AND (tools OR solutions OR frameworks)”. We relied solely
on Google because, to the best of our knowledge, no prior academic stud-
ies have systematically catalogued PaC tools. This search was conducted in
March 2025. Following the methodology of similar prior studies [9, 10], we
collected all relevant PaC tools mentioned within the first 100 search results.
In total, we identified 28 unique PaC tools. Which can be found in our
replication package [11].
2⃝Filtering PaC Tools
The first two authors jointly reviewed the official documentation of each
tool during a series of discussion meetings to apply our inclusion criteria.
Tools were retained if they were (i) open-source and (ii) primarily designed
for implementing policies as code, or if they provided clear documentation on
PaC-specific modules, languages, or enforcement mechanisms. Importantly,
we focused on tools whose core purpose is PaC, rather than multi-purpose
tools that blend policy features with broader configuration or provisioning
capabilities. This choice avoids conceptual overlap and prevents conflating
Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) functionalities with dedicated policy specifica-
tion and enforcement mechanisms.
For instance, although tools such as Terraform, Chef, and Ansible are
occasionally cited as PaC tools in some sources [12], their primary pur-
pose—according to their official documentation—is Infrastructure as Code
(IaC), making it difficult to systematically distinguish IaC components from
PaC components. After applying these criteria, we retained 9 PaC tools for
our study. The complete list is available in Table 1.
3⃝Collecting GitHub Projects Using PaC Tools
Once we established the set of PaC tools, we moved into our third step
(Figure 2). For that, we used the GitHub Search API [22] to collect open-
source projects that use the selected PaC tools. Based on the official docu-
mentation of each tool, we identified unique patterns that characterize the
1https://www.google.ca/
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Table 1: Overview of PaC Tools with Metadata, Language, and Descriptions. Size in KB.
PaC Tool Size(KB) Stars ForksReleasesLanguageDescription
Open PolicyAgent (OPA)1,091,526 10,338 1,425 117 Go An open source, general-purpose policyengine [13].HashiCorpSentinel 330 52 13 10 Go A logic-based policies language formanaging your policy. [14].Pulumi 187,11423,247 1,204 313 Go A crossGuard policy-as-code for IaC andaccount insights [15].Cedar PolicyLanguage 8,582 1,041 100 38 Rust A language for writing policies in yourapplications [16].Kyverno OSS151,0896,414 1,028 250 Go A cloud-native Kubernetes policymanagement [17].Cloud Custodian136,1095,694 1,545 78 PythonA rules engine for managing policies incloud infrastructure [18].AWS Config4,595 468 172 38 PythonA tool that allows developers to writepolicies rules in AWS. [19].GateKeeper 182,8323,909 793 121 Go A kubernetes policy controller [20].Kubewarden2,982 209 37 122 Go A dynamic admission controller that usespolicies [21].
adoption of each PaC tool within a GitHub repository. For instance, OPA
and HashiCorp Sentinel use specific languages that can be identified through
file extensions (.regoand.sentinel, respectively), while other tools like
Gatekeeper can be detected by searching for YAML files containing the key-
wordConstraintTemplate. The complete list of detection patterns is pro-
vided in our replication package [11].
This collection process initially yielded 6,010 candidate repositories for
all PaC tools. We then removed 68 duplicate entries, since the search was at
the file level, resulting in 5,942 unique repositories. To filter out irrelevant or
outdated projects, we applied the following filtering criteria, adapted from
best research practices [9, 23, 24]:
•Size:Repository must have a size>0 KB.
•Popularity:Repository must have≥5 starsorand≥5 forks.
•Activity:The last commit must have been within 2024.
After applying these filtering criteria, we retained a final dataset of 399
OSS projects for analysis. Figure 3 shows that approximately 75% of the re-
maining projects have low to moderate values across key metadata attributes
(e.g., fewer than 10 contributors, 100 stars, 50 months of age, or 1MB in size),
whileafewprojectsstandoutasmatureorhighlyactive. Dataanalysisbased
on this project sample is presented in Section 4.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
PaC Tools from website. Filtering PaC Tools. Collecting GitHub
projects using PaC Tools.
PaC tools popularity
1 2 3
Using a search query Filter by OSS and easy identification Based on PaC identified pattern
Projects
Categorization
Analyzing
Co-usage of
PaC tools
Identifying
purpose of using
PaC tools
RQ1 RQ2 RQ3 RQ4
III. Study Design
IV. Results
Figure 2: Overview of our research workflow.
Figure 3: Distribution of project metrics using PaC tools: Age (months), Size (bytes),
Stars (popularity), and Contributors (collaboration) across our study projects.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
4. RESULTS
4.1.RQ1: What is the popularity of different PaC tools in OSS
projects?
4.1.1.Motivation
PaC tools are designed to define and enforce policies through high-level
programming languages [5]. These tools enable organizations to automate
policy enforcement across cloud-native environments as part of the software
development lifecycle [5]. However, integrating PaC tools into software work-
flows can be challenging due to the diversity of available tools and the com-
plexity of their configurations [25, 26, 27]. Investigating the popularity of
these tools in OSS projects provides valuable insight into which tools are
most widely adopted and supported in practice. This information can guide
cloud-native development teams in selecting PaC tools that are not only tech-
nicallycapablebutalsobackedbyactivecommunities, betterdocumentation,
and practical usage examples. The popularity of a tool is often a proxy for
its maturity and reliability, making it a critical factor in adoption decisions.
Furthermore, they represent a baseline for researchers for studying adoption
trends and practitioners with guidance toward stable, well-supported solu-
tions.
4.1.2.Approach
To analyze the popularity of PaC tools across the 399 projects using them,
we relied on two complementary metrics:
•Number of files containing PaC code:Since some PaC tools
are built around domain-specific languages (e.g.,.rego,.sentinel,
.cedar), while others are implemented within general-purpose lan-
guages (e.g.,Python,Java), we opted for file-level analysis rather than
line of code level granularity to minimize measurement bias [23]. Based
on the identified patterns defined in Section 3, we scanned all reposi-
tories of our sample, counting the number of files matching each tool’s
pattern. A higher number of matched files indicates greater tool preva-
lence within projects.
•Number of repositories using a PaC tool:To complement the
previous metric, we introduce a second one, the number of distinct
repositories that include at least one file associated with a given PaC
tool. This metric is essential to assess the distribution and popularity of
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
tools across diverse projects. For instance, a tool might be heavily used
in a few large projects (high file count, low repo count) or lightly used
across many projects (low file count, high repo count). A repository is
considered to use a PaC tool if it contains at least one file corresponding
to one of the tool’s identified patterns. Therefore, a higher number of
repositories using a given tool reflects broader adoption across the OSS
ecosystem.
Together, these two metrics offer a better perspective on the popularity
of PaC tools by capturing both their depth of use within individual projects
and their breadth of adoption across projects.
4.1.3.Result
Open Policy Agent (OPA)
Kyverno OSSGateKeeper
Pulumi
HashiCorp Sentinel
AWS Config
Cloud Custodian
Cedar Policy Language (CPL)
Kubewarden
Policy as Code (PaC) T ools
0
20
40
60
80
100
No. of Files (%)
62%
16%
7% 4% 4% 3% 3% 1% 0%
(a) Percentage of PaC usage based on file counts.
Open Policy Agent (OPA)
Kyverno OSS
Pulumi
Cloud Custodian
GateKeeperAWS Config
HashiCorp Sentinel
Cedar Policy Language (CPL)
Kubewarden
PaC T ools
0
20
40
60
80
100
No. of Repos (%)
29%
21% 20% 16% 16%
6% 5% 4% 1%
(b) Percentage of PaC usage based on the number of repositories.
Figure 4: Comparison of Policy as Code (PaC) tool usage
Figure 4 summarizes the popularity of the nine PaC tools across our
dataset of 399 projects. Figure 4a shows the percentage of files matching
PaC tool patterns, capturing the intensity of tool usage within projects,
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
while Figure 4b reports the percentage of repositories using at least one file
from a given PaC tool, reflecting adoption breadth.
From the file-based analysis (Figure 4a), OPA dominates PaC usage, ac-
counting for 62% of all policy-related files that rely on OPA, followed at a
distance by Kyverno (16%) and GateKeeper (7%). Pulumi and HashiCorp
Sentinel each account for 4%, while AWS Config and Cloud Custodian con-
tribute 3% each. Finally, the Cedar Policy Language (1%) shows lower but
still notable adoption, whereas Kubewarden (<1%) has only a minimal pres-
ence. Finally, the top three tools–OPA, Kyverno, and GateKeeper–account
for 85% of the total PaC-related file count, illustrating their central role in
active policy implementation.
In contrast, the repository-level analysis (Figure 4b) shows a more bal-
anced distribution. OPA appears in 29% of projects, followed by Kyverno
(21%), Pulumi(20%), CloudCustodian(16%), andGateKeeper(16%). AWS
Config (6%), HashiCorp Sentinel (5%), the Cedar Policy Language (4%), and
Kubewarden (1%) round out the list. Collectively, the top four tools–OPA,
Kyverno, Pulumi, and Cloud Custodian–account for 82% of the repositories.
Overall, while OPA is the most deeply used tool (in terms of file count),
other tools–especially Kyverno, Pulumi, and Custodian–demonstrate com-
petitive breadth of adoption across OSS projects.
All nine analyzed PaC tools are actively used by developers during
the software development lifecycle. Among them,OPA,Kyverno,
Pulumi, andCloud Custodianemerge as the top four most widely
adopted tools across projects.
4.2.RQ2: What kind of projects adopt PaC tools?
4.2.1.Motivation
Identifying the categories of projects that use PaC tools can reveal prac-
tical contexts where PaC provides value. Understanding this landscape is
critical for several reasons. First, it informs tool developers about the do-
mains and development environments where their tools are being used, sup-
porting future improvements and integration strategies. Second, it helps
practitioners make informed decisions about where to adopt PaC or enhance
existing development practices by aligning with project categories where PaC
is commonly used, thereby supporting the development of more secure and
governable software systems. Finally, it offers researchers a foundation for
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
further empirical studies into the effectiveness, challenges, and potential of
PaC in specific software development contexts.
4.2.2.Approach
To answer this research question, we conducted a manual qualitative anal-
ysis of the open-source repositories that use PaC tools. This analysis was
carried out by two researchers with strong backgrounds in Software Engi-
neering for AI (SE4AI) and AI for Software Engineering (AI4SE).
First, our labeling process began with a group discussion on an initial
set of 20 repositories. The objective was to review these samples together
and establish a shared understanding of the labeling categories. For this, we
used the project taxonomy proposed by Majidi et al. [28] as a baseline and
adapted it based on empirical evidence from our dataset, while introducing
new categories when applicable. During labeling, we examined a variety of
project metadata, including the GitHub repository name and topics, project
description, README content, and, in some cases, the actual source code
when additional context was needed. The time required to label a single
project varied between 45 seconds and 30 minutes, depending on the com-
plexity and clarity of the project documentation.
Moving on, in order to validate and improve our understanding of the cat-
egories and their definitions, each researcher independently labeled 40% of
our sample of repositories (162 repositories). Next, we calculated the Cohen’s
Kappa agreement score (κ), which yielded a substantial agreement score of
0.77, indicating good consistency between the raters. All possible disagree-
ments were discussed and resolved collaboratively, while also contributing to
the refinement of our target categories. Following this harmonization step,
we proceeded to label the remaining 217 repositories in parallel, applying the
refined category schema. This phase achieved a near-perfect agreement score
of 0.81. Once again, any remaining disagreements were resolved via collabo-
rative discussion. As a result of this iterative manual inspection and reconcil-
iation process, we categorized the dataset into six distinct project categories:
DevOps, Toolkit, MLOps, Documentation, AI/Research, and Application
System.
4.2.3.Result
Our manual categorization of our sample of GitHub repositories (399)
shows that PaC tools are adopted across a diverse range of project types.
Table 2 presents the distinct categories we identified (6) along with their
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Table 2: Distribution of Project Categories with Descriptions and Median Repository
Metrics. The columns report the number and proportion of repositories per category,
along with the median values for repository size (in kilobytes), number of contributors,
forks, and stars.
Category Descriptions Repos(%) Size(KB)ContribForksStars
DevOps Projects that leverage infrastructure andoperations tools (e.g., Kubernetes,Ansible, Docker) to automate theprovisioning, deployment, andgovernance of software applications.
68(17%)49,473 59 88 329
Toolkit Standalone libraries, frameworks, APIs,plugins, or modules that offer reusablefunctionalities or components to simplifysoftware development.
127(32%)13,354 23 40 152
MLOps These projects combine AI/ML modelswith DevOps tools and practices toautomate the ML lifecycle, includingmodel training, deployment, monitoring,and governance.
6 (1%) 10,104 4 33 164
Documentation Projects that primarily serve asdocumentation, tutorials, workshops,demo or use case.
147(37%)11,735 15 29 46
AI/Research Academic or experimental projectsinvolving AI/ML models or techniques.1(0.2%)200 3 6 43
ApplicationSystem These are software projects or programs.They may include web applications ortraditional systems without AI/MLcomponents.
50(12%)26,253 22 31 80
Total 399(100%)111,119126 227 814
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
median repository characteristics. The most prevalent category isDocu-
mentation(37%), comprising tutorials, workshops, and example use cases
(e.g.,aws-samples/cfn101-workshop[29]). These projects tend to be modest
in size and activity, with a median of 15 contributors, reflecting their role as
educational or demonstrative resources. Next, we have the categoryToolkit
(32%), mainly consisting of reusable libraries, APIs, and modules supporting
software development (e.g.,kubescape/regolibrary[30]). These projects
show moderate engagement, enabling integration and extension of PaC ca-
pabilities.
DevOpsprojects (17%) adopt PaC tools in infrastructure automation
and governance workflows, consistent with their intended use in cloud-native
systems (e.g.,cloudposse/atmos[31]). These repositories show the highest
median values across all metrics, indicating production-grade adoption.Ap-
plication System (12%)includes software systems–often web-based–that
embedPaCtoolstoenforcepoliciesatruntime(e.g.,aquasecurity/postee[32]).
MLOps (1%)projects, though few, integrate PaC tools within ML pipelines
to support secure, trustworthy AI practices (e.g.,deployKF/deployKF[33]).
Their presence signals early but growing interest in applying policy gov-
ernance to AI systems. Finally, we identified a single project under the
AI/Researchcategory (DataBassGit/AssistAF[34]).
Overall, we observed that PaC tools are predominantly used indoc-
umentationandtoolkits, reflecting their current ecosystem-building
phase. Nonetheless, their adoption extends to a diverse range of do-
mains, includingDevOps,application systems, andMLOps.
4.3.RQ3: How is PaC used in practice across different projects?
4.3.1.Motivation
While prior questions establish the popularity and adoption contexts of
PaC tools, they do not inform the types of policies being implemented. Un-
derstanding how PaC is used in practice–i.e., the specific policy concerns
being encoded–provides deeper insights into the functional roles these tools
play within real-world software projects. Identifying which types of policies
are most commonly defined can help assess how these tools align with devel-
oper intentions and organizational priorities. Answering this question offers
practical value for tool developers, as (i) it helps to identify which policy
concerns receive the most attention, where existing tools may fall short, and
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
(ii) how they can be improved to better align with developer workflows and
organizational goals.
4.3.2.Approach
To investigate how PaC tools are used in practice and to identify the
target resources governed by these policies, we employed a stratified random
sampling approach combined with expert-guided policy analysis [35, 36, 37].
For that, we followed the next steps:
1 Data Collection
From the full dataset (12,152 files from 399 repositories), we extracted a
total of 373 PaC policy files using a 95% confidence level and a 5% confidence
interval [10]. Stratified random sampling ensured proportional representation
across different PaC tools.
2 LLM-as-a-Judge - PaC Analysis
To analyze and classify policies, we adopt theLLM-as-a-Judgeapproach,
which treats LLMs as reference-free evaluators capable of categorizing in-
puts based on structured schema [38]. This approach has shown promise
in various domains of software engineering, including code summarization,
bug triaging, and automated documentation [35, 38]. Inspired by this frame-
work, each policy from the selected subset of files was analyzed using a LLM,
specificallygpt-4o-mini, configured with a temperature of 0.2 [35]. The
LLM was prompted with a detailed schema to classify each policy across
seven structured dimensions: Primary Purpose, Sub-purposes, Taxonomy
Category, Taxonomy Sub-category, Policy Implemented, and Rationale. The
complete prompt and logic are included in our replication package [11]. The
prompt guided the LLM to provide its answer in JSON.
3 Manual Labelling - Pilot Study
Knowing that no previous study defined categories for PaC, our goal is
to build a taxonomy from our set of selected policies. For that, we ini-
tially rely on the judgment of LLMs. Our approach is inspired by recent
empirical work that also used LLM-generated judgments as a starting point
for taxonomy construction [35], which developed a taxonomy of inefficient
Python code generated by LLM using LLM-assisted analysis. Following this
methodological precedent, we used LLM outputs as an initial guide. To start
this process, we randomly selected a sample of 111 (S), representing 30% of
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
the total sampleT, while maintaining proportional representation across all
identified PaC tools. To ensure quality and reliability, two researchers with
expertise in Software Engineering and Machine Learning collaboratively re-
viewed and refined the LLM-generated taxonomy entries through discussion.
Using an open coding approach [39], the researchers systematically evaluated
each policy file by examining the LLM-assigned category and sub-category in
relation to the content and structure of the policy. During this process, sev-
eral issues with the raw LLM labels emerged. The LLM frequently produced
overly specific categories such as“Kubernetes Workloads”,“Resource Paths”,
“Network Access”, or“Infrastructure Deployment Configurations”. Through
open coding, these fragmented or overly narrow labels were abstracted into
broader, categories such asWorkload Management,“Resource Management”,
and“Network Management”. Similarly, the LLM often used semantically
overlapping high-level categories—such as“Security Governance”,“Access
Control”, and“Resource Governance”—in inconsistent or interchangeable
ways. Manual inspection revealed that many policies labeled as“Security
Governance”were actually enforcing direct access restrictions (e.g., SSH ac-
cess rules, API authorization, file-path permissions). These were therefore
consolidated under a unified“Access Control”category. This manual re-
finement was essential to correct hallucinations, resolve misinterpretations,
and ensure conceptual coherence in the taxonomy [40]. Of the 111 pilot
samples, 95 LLM-proposed labels were judged as conceptually acceptable
with minor modifications, whereas 18 required substantive discussion and
re-labelling. Through this open coding process, we arrived at an initial tax-
onomy composed of 5 main categories and 15 sub-categories, grounded in
both automated and expert insights.
4 Full Dataset Labeling
Once the pilot study was done, we moved into the second phase of our
process by labelling the remaining samples of the dataset (70%), denoted as
R. However, this time, we adopted a refined version of the LLM prompt, as
we used the initial taxonomy, derived from the pilot study, as a guide to the
LLM. The prompt explicitly asked the LLM to classify each policy according
to the predefined categories and sub-categories. If a policy did not fit within
the provided taxonomy, the LLM was instructed to suggest a new label. A
notable outcome of this phase is that the taxonomy derived from the pilot
sample proved fully stable when applied to the full dataset. No new top-level
categories emerged during the full labelling step, indicating that the pilot-
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Figure 5: A Taxonomy of Policy-as-Code Usage and Adoption Patterns
derived categories captured the principal governance intents present across
tools. Likewise, at the sub-category level, all sub-categories observed in the
full dataset had already been identified during the pilot phase. This confirms
that the pilot taxonomy provided comprehensive coverage of the policy space
and required no structural extensions when applied to the remaining samples.
In contrast to the pilot study, two researchers independently reviewed the
outputs. Inter-rater agreement was assessed using Cohen’s Kappa coefficient
[41] to evaluate classification consistency across two dimensions: taxonomy
category and sub-category. The resulting agreement scores were as follows:
0.843for category,0.840for sub-category. These values indicate strong
inter-rater reliability. All disagreements were resolved through discussion
until full consensus was reached.
4.3.3.Results
Figure 5 presents the taxonomy of PaC usage, which consists of five main
categories and fourteen sub-categories. During the taxonomy construction
process, we were unable to classify 28 PaC files due to insufficient or in-
complete code content. Now, we describe each main category along with its
associated sub-categories as follows.
Security Governance
This category includes policies designed to protect software systems by
defining and enforcing security-related rules. These rules ensure secure con-
figurations, access restrictions, and appropriate behavior of infrastructure
and services.
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
•Access Control:This sub-category includes policies that restrict or
grant access to specific resources based on roles, identity, or contextual
factors. Examples include authorization policies for users, groups, or
services that managewhocan accesswhatand under what conditions.
•Configuration Validation:These policies ensure that individual re-
sources conform to specific security, structural, or operational con-
straints before being accepted or deployed. It focuses on validating
fields such as volume types, base images, identity settings, and con-
figuration correctness to prevent misconfigurations and enforce secure
defaults.
•Secrets Management:These policies focus on securing sensitive data
such as API tokens, credentials, and keys. Policies in this sub-category
enforce best practices for handling secrets–e.g., ensuring secrets are not
hard-coded or are retrieved securely from a secrets manager.
•NetworkManagement:Thesepoliciesregulatetrafficflow, IPwhitelist-
ing, and connectivity rules within a system. They often include firewall
rules, port restrictions, and control over ingress/egress configurations
to reduce attack surfaces.
•Resource Management:These policies enforce constraints on the
creation, usage, and allocation of system resources such as CPU, mem-
ory, containers, VMs, disk, clusters and Kubernetes pods. Typical
policies ensure the creation, usage or allocation of secure system re-
sources.
•SecurityReviewCompliance:Itcontainspoliciesthatverifywhether
certain conditions indicating security review processes have been prop-
erly addressed. This ensures traceability and accountability during
deployment and operational workflows.
•Vulnerability Management:These policies aim to detect and pre-
vent the deployment of software with known vulnerabilities or missing
updates. This may include policies enforcing up-to-date package ver-
sions or disallowing insecure dependencies.
•Actions Restrictions:This sub-category focuses on preventing the
execution of specific actions or commands that are considered harmful,
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
unauthorized, or non-compliant with security policies. For example,
a policy might deny execution of any command listed in a predefined
deny list within a cloud-native container environment.
•Workloads Management:This sub-category focuses on the config-
uration and enforcement of operational constraints for workloads. For
example, policies may deny the deployment of workloads that automat-
ically mount service account tokens to enhance runtime security.
Compliance Governance
This taxonomy category ensures systems adhere to organizational poli-
cies, industry standards, and legal requirements. It covers internal best prac-
tices, external regulations, and service-specific constraints.
•Resource Compliance:Policies that enforces structural or content
rules on resource definitions to comply with organizational standards.
These policies verify whether a resource instance meets defined com-
pliance criteria–typically structural, security, or configuration require-
ments. These policies operate at the level of resource correctness, such
as ensuring a Kubernetes Pod has a required label, a Terraform file
is in valid format, or a YAML config is syntactically and semantically
sound.
•Service Compliance:These policies ensure that services meet spe-
cific operational, security, or performance requirements–e.g., ensuring
logging or monitoring is enabled for critical services.
•Standards Enforcement:This category enforces adherence of a par-
ticular technology to its best practice implementations, often to im-
prove maintainability, reusability, and operational consistency. It in-
cludes policies that ensure consistent naming, approved module usage,
tagging standards, and container optimization across systems. For ex-
ample, a common policy requires the inclusion ofyum clean allafter
yum installcommands in Dockerfile2 to ensure optimized image sizes
and prevent unnecessary cache buildup.
2https://shorturl.at/QnN19
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Deployment Governance
Security Governance
Workflow Automation
Compliance Governance
Cost Optimization
Main categories of purpose
AWS Config
Cedar Policy Language
Cloud Custodian
GateKeeper
HashiCorp Sentinel
Kubewarden
Kyverno OSS
Open Policy Agent (OPA)
Pulumi
PaC tools
Value 20 40 60
Figure 6: Mapping PaC Tools to Governance Categories in OSS (Bubble size = % share)
Cost Optimization
Thiscategoryincludespoliciesaimedatreducingunnecessarycloudspend-
ing. Examples include enforcing resource quotas, limiting compute capacity,
and identifying idle or underutilized resources.
Workflow Automation
This category includes policies that trigger actions or workflows auto-
matically, such as enforcing compliance during CI/CD, triggering audits, or
provisioning of clouds infrastructure, resource allocation.
Deployment Governance
This category includes policies that govern the secure, compliant, and au-
ditable deployment of software systems. It ensures that deployments are per-
formed by authorized entities, under predefined conditions, and in alignment
with operational and security requirements–such as validating artifact in-
tegrity, enforcing configuration constraints, and controlling deployment per-
missions.
•Key Management:This sub-category focuses on the creation, mon-
itoring, and lifecycle control of deployment-related keys. For example,
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
a policy might trigger alerts when a new deploy key is created, ensur-
ing visibility and accountability over sensitive credential usage during
deployment workflows.
•Access Control:This sub-category focuses on regulating who can
perform which deployment actions and under what conditions. Poli-
cies in this group ensure that only specific users or agents with verified
identities and attributes are permitted to initiate deployment opera-
tions.
In complement to our taxonomy, Figure 6 offers a detailed breakdown of
how different PaC tools are distributed across the five main governance cat-
egories. Each bubble’s area is proportional to the percentage of policies
within that tool that fall into the corresponding category (occurrences÷
total policies for that tool×100). The legend markers (20/40/60) indi-
cate representative percentage levels; the absence of a bubble denotes no ob-
served policy for that tool–category pair. We clearly observe thatSecurity
Governance, andCompliance Governancedominate the landscape, appear-
ing across nearly all tools. Tools like OPA, Kyverno, and Pulumi exhibit
substantial focus on security policies while sharing other purposes. Con-
versely,Cost Optimizationremains the least targeted category, with only
a few scattered instances across tools like Kyverno OSS and GateKeeper.
This figure shows the importance of tool-purpose alignment in real-world
PaC adoption: while some tools offer broad applicability, others like kuber-
warden and cedar are more specialized.
We identified five main categories of PaC usage, with Security Gov-
ernance (65.4%) and Compliance Governance (21.3%) emerging as
the most dominant purposes across the OSS ecosystem. While
less frequent categories–such as Workflow Automation, Deployment
Governance, and especially Cost Optimization–highlight emerging or
context-specific adoption needs.
4.4.RQ4: Are different PaC tools used together?
4.4.1.Motivation
When addressing RQ1, we observed that OPA alone accounts for more
than half of the PaC-related files, while RQ3 shows that some purposes are
shared by multiple PaC tools. These findings raised the question of whether
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
some PaC tools are commonly used in conjunction with other PaC tools. Un-
derstanding the co-usage of PaC tools can provide valuable insights for sev-
eral stakeholders: (i) practitioners may benefit from knowledge about com-
mon tool combinations to inform their adoption strategies and integration
workflows; (ii) researchers can further investigate the rationale behind tool
combinations and their complementary use cases; and (iii) tool developers
can enhance interoperability by designing features that facilitate integration
with other commonly co-used PaC tools.
4.4.2.Approach
To investigate whether different PaC tools are used together in the same
projects, we performed a co-usage analysis across the 399 repositories. This
analysis consisted of the following steps:
Binary Co-usage Matrix Construction
For each repository, we identified the set of tools used, based on the
presence of corresponding policy files as defined in our identification patterns
(see Section 3). Next, we take this information and build a binary matrix
where rows represent repositories and columns indicate the presence (1) or
absence (0) of each PaC tool.
Co-usage Frequency Calculation
Using the binary matrixBof sizen×m(wherenis the number of
repositories andmthe number of PaC tools), we computed a symmetric co-
usage matrixCby multiplying the transpose ofBwith itself:C=B ⊤B.
Each cellC ij in the resulting matrix represents the number of repositories
where both toolsiandjare used together.
Normalization & Co-usage Intensity Analysis
To better understand the relative co-usage, we normalized the matrix
to express values as a percentage of total repositories, allowing for intuitive
identification of strong co-usage relationships between specific tools. Finally,
to complement the matrix co-usage, we also calculated how many distinct
PaC tools were used per repository (e.g., using 1, 2, 3, or more tools).
4.4.3.Result
Figure 7 presents the co-usage matrix between PaC tools, showing how
frequently tools appear together across repositories. Most PaC tools are
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
HashiCorp Sentinel
Open Policy Agent (OPA)
Pulumi
Cedar Policy Language (CPL)
Kyverno OSS
Cloud Custodian
AWS ConfigGateKeeperKubewarden
PaC T ools
HashiCorp Sentinel
Open Policy Agent (OPA)
Pulumi
Cedar Policy Language (CPL)
Kyverno OSS
Cloud Custodian
AWS Config
GateKeeper
Kubewarden
PaC T ools
1.00 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.00
0.01 1.00 0.01 0.01 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.15 0.00
0.00 0.12 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.17 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.08 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.02 0.03 0.16 0.05
0.00 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.03 1.00 0.03 0.02 0.02
0.00 0.08 0.12 0.00 0.12 0.08 1.00 0.00 0.00
0.01 0.30 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.01 0.00 1.00 0.01
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.25 0.00 0.25 1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 7: Co-usage matrix of PaC tools.
predominantly used in isolation, with co-usage values close to zero across
most pairs. However, a few tools demonstrate notable integration patterns.
In particular, OPA exhibits the highest co-usage with GateKeeper (30%),
followed by Cedar Policy Language (17%) and Pulumi (12%). Overall, OPA
is used in combination with seven other PaC tools, except Kubewarden.
This pattern can be explained by OPA’s design as a general-purpose policy
engine, which benefits from coupling with domain-specific tools that offer
more context-aware policy abstractions, as highlighted in Section 4.3. While
the large majority of repositories (85.24%) adopt only one PaC tool, 13.53%
of projects use two tools, and very few employ three tools simultaneously
(1.23%). Notably, only one project uses more than three PaC tools. This
finding suggests that while PaC tools can be combined, they are most often
adopted in isolation.
Most OSS projects (85.24%) adopt only one PaC tool, showing a
clear preference for isolated use. Multi-tool adoption is less common
(14.76%), most notablyOPAwithGateKeeper, though OPA also
appears with seven other tools, suggesting emerging integration prac-
tices.
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
5. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATION
This section presents the implications of our findings for the research
community, practitioners, and tools developers.
Researchers
Our study offers a broad perspective on how practitioners use PaC tools
in open-source projects. The results show that these tools are widely adopted
in different project categories, particularly those serving as documentation
(Table 2). Future research could investigate the factors shaping adoption,
such as project maturity, community engagement, and organizational needs.
Beyond documentation, PaC tools are most frequently used in traditional
software systems, with limited adoption in Software 2.0 projects that embed
AI or ML components. This underrepresentation suggests that the use of
PaC in AI-enabled systems remains at an early stage, possibly because exist-
ing tools do not yet address the unique governance requirements of AI. This
gap opens promising directions for research on how PaC frameworks could
evolve to support trustworthiness, compliance, and lifecycle governance in
intelligent systems, especially under emerging regulations such as the EU AI
Act. Our methodological approach–combining LLM-assisted classification
with expert validation–also illustrates both the potential and the limitations
of using AI in empirical software engineering. This hybrid strategy highlights
opportunities for advancing methods that integrate automated classification
with human expertise, enabling the scalable analysis of large, heterogeneous
code corpora while maintaining reliability and interpretability. Finally, our
taxonomy provides a foundation for future extensions. As governance needs
evolve in domains such as AI, cloud-native systems, and regulatory compli-
ance, new categories and subcategories should be incorporated to capture
emerging practices.
PaC Tool Developers
Our results show that PaC tools are mainly used for security governance
and compliance, with limited cases of advanced automation or multi-tool
integration. Tool developers should therefore focus on improving the inter-
operability of PaC tools. Co-usage patterns–such as OPA frequently paired
with GateKeeper–signal demand for complementary features that could be
enabled through standardized APIs, modular architectures, or shared policy
libraries to ease the combination of multiple PaC tools. The prominence
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
of documentation-oriented projects further highlights the importance of ac-
cessible learning resources and well-designed examples as adoption drivers.
Developers should also explore opportunities in emerging domains such as
MLOps, where policies must extend beyond infrastructure governance to ad-
dress fairness, accountability, and regulatory compliance.
Practitioners
For practitioners, our study offers concrete insights into the adoption
contexts and usage patterns of PaC tools. These findings can help them
understandtoolpopularityandthediversepurposesforwhichPaCisapplied,
informing the design and implementation of policies in their own systems.
Our results also show that PaC tools often align with specific purposes–
for example, Kuberwarden, which is more specialized for compliance, and
Cedar specializes in security governance. Recognizing these distinctions can
guide practitioners in selecting tools that best match their deployment and
governance needs, rather than treating all PaC tools as interchangeable.
6. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we review research that intersects with our investigation
on the adoption and usage of PaC tools in software engineering.
Chinamanagonda et al. [42] highlight the growing reliance on automation
to enforce cloud governance, showing how policy-driven frameworks improve
compliance, security, and operational efficiency by reducing human error and
enabling continuous monitoring. Xu et al. [43] present Aurasium, a system
that enforces security and privacy policies in Android applications by repack-
aging APKs with user-level sandboxing. Their approach demonstrates how
static instrumentation and runtime monitoring enable fine-grained enforce-
ment without OS modifications.
Verdet et al. [44] conduct an empirical study of security policies in Ter-
raform scripts across AWS, Azure, and GCP. Using static analysis tools such
as Checkov and Tfsec, they assess the prevalence and enforcement of 682
security policies. While focused on IaC, their findings complement our work
by providing evidence on policy adoption in cloud infrastructure, whereas
we broaden the scope to include PaC tools for access control, compliance,
and validation (e.g., OPA, Kyverno). He et al. [45] introduce ReCAPS, a
requirements-based method for integrating access control policy specifica-
tion into the software development process. Their case study shows how
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
inconsistencies between requirements, policies, and design artifacts can be
systematically resolved, resonating with our interest in automating policy
enforcement in OSS projects.
Wei et al. [46] conducted a comprehensive multivocal literature review
of theEverything-as-Code(EaC) paradigm and proposed a conceptual tax-
onomy encompassing multiple dimensions, includingInfrastructure-as-Code,
Configuration-as-Code, and Policy-as-Code, organized into six broader func-
tional layers. Within this model, they emphasize security and compliance as
central governance concerns across several PaC practices, which align with
two of the dominant categories identified in our empirical taxonomy. Our
study complements Wei et al.’s work by providing large-scale empirical ev-
idence from open-source repositories, illustrating how these governance as-
pects manifest in practice. Furthermore, our analysis extends beyond the
conceptual dimensions described by Wei et al. by uncovering additional,
practice-driven categories,cost optimization, workflow automation, and de-
ployment governance, that emerge from real-world PaC adoption.
Caracciolo et al [47] explore the implementation of compliance automa-
tionincloudenvironmentsusingthePolicy-as-Codeparadigm. Thestudyde-
velops a proof-of-concept integrating OPA Gatekeeper within a cloud-based
DevSecOps pipeline to demonstrate how policies can be automatically en-
forced across cloud workloads. This work complements our research by pro-
viding a system-level evaluation of PaC effectiveness in enforcing compliance
and security policies within practical DevOps workflows.
Together, these studies demonstrate how policy management and au-
tomation have been advanced across mobile, web, and cloud domains. Yet,
to the best of our knowledge, no prior work has undertaken a large-scale
empirical investigation of PaC adoption in open-source projects. Our study
addresses this gap by providing a comprehensive analysis of PaC usage trends
in real-world repositories.
7. THREATS TO VALIDITY
Now, we discuss the thread on the validity of our work.
Construct validity threats
Threats to construct validity primarily concern errors in identifying PaC
tools based on ad-hoc detection patterns. To reduce this risk, we system-
atically derived patterns from official tool documentation and made them
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
publicly available in our replication package [11]. Another concern is false
positives, such as repositories including PaC files only as illustrative exam-
ples. We mitigated this risk in two ways. First, at the project selection
stage, we excluded “toy” repositories using activity, popularity, and accessi-
bility filters. Second, during taxonomy construction, we discarded files whose
content was insufficient to determine an intended usage, thereby reducing the
influence of non-representative artifacts on our findings.
Internal validity threats
We manually classified projects using PaC tools and analyzed a sam-
ple of PaC code to understand the types of projects adopting these tools
and the purposes for which they are employed. Manual labeling, however,
introduces risks to reliability, and even LLM-based classification can suffer
from errors such as hallucinations. To mitigate these risks, we applied strat-
ified sampling and a double-coding strategy: two researchers independently
performed the labeling and evaluated inter-rater agreement, achieving sub-
stantial consistency (see Section 4.3), in line with established practices in
software engineering research [23, 35]. Despite these measures, we acknowl-
edge that some practitioners’ use of PaC tools may fall outside the scope of
our taxonomy. Future surveys and qualitative studies would be valuable to
validate and extend our findings.
Another possible threat arises from our decision to treat each PaC file
as an atomic unit of analysis. This assumes that the dominant concern ex-
pressed in a file reflects its primary purpose. In practice, a file may encode
multiple, overlapping concerns that are not fully captured by our catego-
rization. We chose the file level because most PaC frameworks—such as
Rego, Sentinel, or JSON/YAML-based engines—are built on declarative lan-
guages where the file constitutes the standard unit of authoring, execution,
and distribution. This makes the file level the most natural lens through
which to study developer practices. To reduce oversimplification, we de-
signed our prompt and review process to capture both primary purposes and
sub-purposes, and we applied normalization across heterogeneous outputs.
Nevertheless, future work could explore finer-grained analyses, for instance
at the level of individual rules or function calls, to better capture cases where
a single file encodes multiple governance concerns.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
External validity threats
Our dataset is restricted to open-source projects hosted on GitHub, which
may not fully represent proprietary or enterprise contexts where PaC adop-
tion could follow different practices and motivations. Moreover, our filtering
criteria (e.g., minimum stars, forks, and recent activity) excluded smaller
or inactive projects, potentially underrepresenting early experimentation or
niche usage. While our findings offer valuable insights into adoption trends
in the open-source ecosystem, caution is warranted when extrapolating them
to industrial settings. Future work should examine custom in-house solutions
and proprietary tools, which may exhibit distinct usage patterns.
8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented the first large-scale empirical study of PaC adoption
in open-source projects. We examined nine prominent tools and showed that
they are mainly used in traditional software systems, while beginning to gain
traction in intelligent systems.
Using LLM-assisted classification combined with systematic sampling and
expert validation, we found that PaC tools are most commonly applied to
security and compliance governance. Adoption is also shaped by resource
environments, with Kubernetes-native tools and cloud-specific frameworks
dominating their domains. Analysis of co-usage patterns revealed that, al-
though OPA is occasionally combined with other tools, most projects adopt
a single PaC tool in isolation.
Future work will investigate underutilized features that may indicate us-
abilitychallengesoropportunitiesfortoolevolution, andquantitativelystudy
factors influencing successful adoption across both open-source and propri-
etary contexts.
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ThisworkissupportedbytheDEELprojectCRDPJ537462-18fundedby
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)
and the Consortium for Research and Innovation in Aerospace in Québec
(CRIAQ), together with its industrial partners Thales Canada inc, Bell Tex-
tron Canada Limited, CAE inc and Bombardier inc.
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
References
[1] P. Anthonysamy, A. Rashid, R. Chitchyan, Privacy requirements:
Present & future, in: 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference
on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society Track (ICSE-
SEIS), 2017, pp. 13–22.doi:10.1109/ICSE-SEIS.2017.3.
[2] A. Anwar, A. Khormali, D. Nyang, A. Mohaisen, Understanding the
hidden cost of software vulnerabilities: Measurements and predictions,
in: International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication
Systems, Springer, 2018, pp. 377–395.
[3] B. N. Taylor, C. E. Kuyatt, et al., Guidelines for evaluating and ex-
pressing the uncertainty of NIST measurement results, Vol. 1297, US
Department of Commerce, Technology Administration, National Insti-
tute of ..., 1994.
[4] E. A. I. Act, The eu artificial intelligence act, European Union (2024).
[5] Policy as code, accessed March 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://shorturl.at/DQ7QX
[6] Open policy agent (opa), accessed March 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://www.openpolicyagent.org/
[7] Kyverno, accessed March 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://kyverno.io/
[8] What is policy as code (pac) & how do you implement it?, accessed
June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://spacelift.io/blog/what-is-policy-as-code#
policy-as-code-tools
[9] P. L. Foalem, L. D. Silva, F. Khomh, H. Li, E. Merlo, Logging require-
ment for continuous auditing of responsible machine learning-based ap-
plications, Empirical Software Engineering 30 (3) (2025) 97.
[10] P. L. Foalem, F. Khomh, H. Li, Studying logging practice in machine
learning-based applications, Information and Software Technology 170
(2024) 107450.
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
[11] Replication package,https://github.com/foalem/Pac-paper, re-
trieved August 2025.
[12] Policy as code tools & examples to make better infrastructure easier,
anywhere, accessed March 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://www.puppet.com/blog/policy-as-code
[13] Open policy agent (opa), accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://www.openpolicyagent.org/
[14] Hashicorp sentinel, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://developer.hashicorp.com/sentinel/docs/
concepts/policy-as-code
[15] Pulumi crossguard: Core concepts, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/using-pulumi/
crossguard/core-concepts/
[16] Cedar policy language (cpl), accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://docs.cedarpolicy.com/
[17] Kyverno oss: Security documentation, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://kyverno.io/docs/security/
[18] Cloud custodian documentation, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://cloudcustodian.io/docs/
[19] Aws config, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://aws.amazon.com/config/
[20] Opa gatekeeper documentation, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/
website/docs/
[21] Kubewarden, accessed June 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://www.kubewarden.io/
[22] Github rest api documentation, accessed March 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://docs.github.com/en/rest?apiVersion=2022-11-28
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
[23] M. Openja, F. Majidi, F. Khomh, B. Chembakottu, H. Li, Studying the
practices of deploying machine learning projects on docker, in: Proceed-
ings of the 26th international conference on evaluation and assessment
in software engineering, 2022, pp. 190–200.
[24] D. Gonzalez, T. Zimmermann, N. Nagappan, The state of the ml-
universe: 10 years of artificial intelligence & machine learning software
development on github, in: Proceedings of the 17th International con-
ference on mining software repositories, 2020, pp. 431–442.
[25] Everyone loves policy as code, no one wants to write rego, accessed
March 2025 (2025).
URLhttps://www.permit.io/blog/no-one-wants-to-write-rego
[26] H. L. Sgard, Navigating the challenges of policy as code in azure,
accessed March 2025 (2024).
URLhttps://hlokensgard.no/2024/01/15/
navigating-the-challenges-of-policy-as-code-in-azure/
[27] How policy-as-code can make your developers infallible, accessed March
2025 (2025).
URLhttps://axiomatics.com/blog/how-policy-as-code-can-make-your-developers-infallible
[28] F. Majidi, M. Openja, F. Khomh, H. Li, An empirical study on the
usage of automated machine learning tools, in: 2022 IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), IEEE,
2022, pp. 59–70.
[29] Repo,https://github.com/aws-samples/cfn101-workshop, re-
trieved August 2025.
[30] Repo,https://github.com/kubescape/regolibrary, retrieved Au-
gust 2025.
[31] Repo,https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos, retrieved August
2025.
[32] Repo,https://github.com/aquasecurity/postee, retrieved August
2025.
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
[33] Repo,https://github.com/deployKF/deployKF, retrieved August
2025.
[34] Repo,https://github.com/DataBassGit/AssistAF, retrieved August
2025.
[35] A. A. Abbassi, L. Da Silva, A. Nikanjam, F. Khomh, Unveiling inef-
ficiencies in llm-generated code: Toward a comprehensive taxonomy,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06327 (2025).
[36] A. Ouni, I. Saidani, E. Alomar, M. W. Mkaouer, An empirical study on
continuous integration trends, topics and challenges in stack overflow,
in: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 141–151.
[37] Z. Chen, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, H. Wang, T. Xie, X. Liu, A comprehensive
study on challenges in deploying deep learning based software, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 28th ACM joint meeting on European software engineer-
ing conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineer-
ing, 2020, pp. 750–762.
[38] H. Li, C.-P. Bezemer, A. E. Hassan, Software engineering and foun-
dation models: Insights from industry blogs using a jury of foundation
models, in: 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software
Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), 2025, pp.
307–318.doi:10.1109/ICSE-SEIP66354.2025.00033.
[39] C. B. Seaman, Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software en-
gineering, IEEE Transactions on software engineering 25 (4) (1999) 557–
572.
[40] Z. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, E. Shi, Y. Ma, W. Zhong, J. Chen,
M. Mao, Z. Zheng, Llm hallucinations in practical code generation:
Phenomena, mechanism, and mitigation, Proceedings of the ACM on
Software Engineering 2 (ISSTA) (2025) 481–503.
[41] J. Cohen, A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales, Educational and
psychological measurement 20 (1) (1960) 37–46.
[42] S. Chinamanagonda, Automating cloud governance-organizations au-
tomating compliance and governance in the cloud (2021).
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
[43] R. Xu, H. Saïdi, R. Anderson, Aurasium: Practical policy enforce-
ment for android applications, in: 21st USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 12), 2012, pp. 539–552.
[44] A. Verdet, M. Hamdaqa, L. D. Silva, F. Khomh, Assessing the adop-
tion of security policies by developers in terraform across different cloud
providers, Empirical Software Engineering 30 (3) (2025) 74.
[45] Q.He, P.Otto, A.I.Anton, L.Jones, Ensuringcompliancebetweenpoli-
cies, requirements and software design: A case study, in: Fourth IEEE
International Workshop on Information Assurance (IWIA’06), IEEE,
2006, pp. 14–pp.
[46] H. Wei, N. Madhavji, J. Steinbacher, Understanding everything as code:
A taxonomy and conceptual model, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05100
(2025).
[47] M. Caracciolo, Policy as code, how to automate cloud compliance verifi-
cation with open-source tools, Ph.D. thesis, Politecnico di Torino (2023).
33
