--- PAGE 1 ---
XGrammar-2: Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine
for Agentic LLMs
Linzhang Li∗
blemiade_qinchuan@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Yixin Dong∗†
yixind@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Guanjie Wang
irfnfnkemed@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Ziyi Xu
xzy2022@sjtu.edu.cn
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Alexander Jiang
akj2@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Tianqi Chen†
tqchen@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University, NVIDIA
Abstract
Modern LLM agents increasingly rely on dynamic structured gener-
ation, such as tool calling and response protocols. Unlike traditional
structured generation with static structures, these workloads vary
both across requests and within a request, posing new challenges
to existing engines. We present XGrammar-2, a structured gener-
ation engine for dynamic agentic workloads. Our design is based
on two key ideas: first-class support for tag-triggered structure
switching, and fine-grained reuse across requests with different
output structures. Concretely, XGrammar-2 introduces TagDispatch
for dynamic structural dispatching and Cross-Grammar Cache for
substructure-level cache reuse across grammars. It further improves
efficiency with an Earley-based adaptive token mask cache, just-in-
time compilation, and repetition state compression. Experiments
show that XGrammar-2 achieves over 6× faster compilation than
prior structured generation engines, and incurs near-zero end-to-
end overhead in modern LLM serving systems.
CCS Concepts
•Computing methodologies→Intelligent agents.
Keywords
Agents, Structured Generation, Large Language Models
ACM Reference Format:
Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi
Chen. 2026. XGrammar-2: Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine
for Agentic LLMs. InProceedings of Under Review.ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 Introduction
Modern LLM agents demonstrate strong capabilities and increas-
ingly rely on complex tool calling and code generation [26]. These
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding authors.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Under Review, 27
©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
agentic applications impose strong requirements on structured
generation, especially for small [27] or compressed models. Con-
strained decoding [8, 15] is widely adopted to guarantee structural
validity by masking invalid tokens at each generation step, enabling
reliable downstream applications with minimal overhead.
Tool Calling:
Llama Tool Calling
(defined by request’s
tool set)
Response Protocol:
OpenAI Harmony
Response Format
Dispatched StructureTag
<function=get_weather>
{"city": ".*"}</function>
<function=search>
{"url": ".*"}</function>
<|channel|>analysis
<|message|>".*"
<|channel|>commentary
to=functions.get_weather
<|message|>{"city": ".*"}
Generation Structure
OK, I need to call a function.
<function=get_weather> {"city":
"Shanghai"}
<|channel|>analysis
<|message|>OK, I need to think
about it.
<|channel|>commentary
to=fucntions.get_weather
<|message|>{"city": "Shanghai"}
Output of LLM
Free-form Text
Figure 1: Some examples of tool calling and response proto-
cols.
However, existing constrained decoding methods [ 9, 12, 33]
largely assume all structures are static and known in advance.
Nowadays, a key characteristic of agentic LLM applications is the
extensive use of tool calling to handle complex tasks. Each LLM re-
quest may contain dozens or even hundreds of possible tools, which
greatly violates the structure assumption: the output structure be-
comes highly dynamic, both across requests and within a single
request. Thisstructural dynamismposes significant efficiency
and expressiveness challenges to existing constrained decoding
systems. We classify the challenge of structural dynamism into two
categories:
Inter-request dynamism.In agent serving scenarios, each request
may expose a different set of tools and schemas, often with per-tool
access control [20, 25]. As a result, the space of possible output
grammars becomes combinatorially large, and each grammar can
itself be complex. Prior approaches typically preprocess the en-
tire grammar and cache it at the request level to reuse identical
structures. Under dynamic tool sets, such caching becomes ineffec-
tive, forcing expensive per-request preprocessing and significantly
increasing time-to-first-token (TTFT).
arXiv:2601.04426v2  [cs.AI]  26 Mar 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
Intra-request dynamism.Within a single request, the model needs
to follow a response protocol such as OpenAI Harmony [16], and
choose from many candidate tools. This requires the structural
constraint to switch depending on the previous LLM output. For
example, generating a tool name determines the JSON schema of
the subsequent arguments [19, 28], while a channel tag token con-
strains the following content to a specific channel, such as reasoning
or output. Such dispatching is difficult to express efficiently with
the Backus-Naur Form (BNF)-like grammars used by existing con-
strained decoding methods, and the large number of tools further
challenges efficient mask generation.
To address these challenges, we propose XGrammar-2, a struc-
tured generation engine for dynamic agentic workloads. Our de-
sign is based on two key ideas: first-class support for tag-triggered
structure switching in agent outputs, and fine-grained reuse across
requests with different output structures. For the former, we intro-
duce TagDispatch, a first-class grammar construct for expressing
tag-triggered structural dispatching within a request. For the latter,
we design a cross-grammar cache that reuses shared substructures
across different grammar combinations. To make this design ef-
ficient in practice, we further develop an Earley-based adaptive
token mask cache, together with just-in-time compilation and rep-
etition compression, to reduce compilation overhead and improve
end-to-end efficiency.
We implement XGrammar-2 as a structured generation engine
compatible with modern LLM inference systems. XGrammar-2 sup-
ports tool-calling formats across major models and enforces strict
compliance with the OpenAI Harmony Response Format [16]. Ex-
perimental results show that XGrammar-2 achieves over 6×tool-
calling compilation speed improvement compared to prior state-of-
the-art methods, while introducing near-zero latency overhead. We
have incorporated XGrammar-2 into open-source serving frame-
works such as SGLang [37] and vLLM [17], improving output relia-
bility in agentic tasks. XGrammar-2 is open-source and has been
adopted in both industry systems and open-source inference en-
gines.
2 Background
2.1 Constrained Decoding and Context-free
Grammar
LLMs like Deepseek-R1 [ 7], gpt-oss [24] all generate the tokens
autoregressively, predicting the next token based on the previous
output. Each time the LLM needs to output a token, it will calculate a
logit vector for the vocabulary and then convert it into a probability
distribution with the softmax function [4]. In the end, a sampler
will choose an output token based on the distribution to output.
Constrained decoding [ 8] is a technique for guiding LLMs to
generate text according to a specified grammar. During each decod-
ing step, tokens that do not conform to the grammar are marked as
invalid, and their corresponding logit values are set to−∞ to assign
them zero probability, thus preventing them from being sampled
and ensuring the output of LLMs follows the grammar.
Context-free Grammar (CFG) [6] is generally used to define the
grammar structures, and it is described by Extended Backus-Naur
Form (EBNF) [1] in most constrained decoding methods. An EBNF
consists of a set of production rules, each representing a symbol
that can be expanded into a sequence of terminal characters or
references to other symbols. With the rule references, EBNF can
naturally express complex recursive structures.
2.2 XGrammar
Constrained decoding modifies the logit vector before the LLM
outputs the next token, requiring a runtime check to determine
whether the token is valid across the entire vocabulary. Without
optimization, this process introduces significant overhead, which
substantially slows down the output speed of LLMs.
XGrammar [9] is designed to achieve near-zero overhead to-
ken mask generation. XGrammar employs a pushdown automaton
parser to trace the output of LLMs. Its key insight is that for each
state in CFGs, there are a lot of tokens that can be determined
to be accepted or rejected within the state’s rule, and there are a
few context-dependent tokens that need the context information
to determine whether they can be accepted by the current state
at runtime. XGrammar stores the pre-computed accepted tokens,
rejected tokens, and context-dependent tokens into the adaptive
token mask cache. With the token mask cache, XGrammar can
skip massive computation for accepted tokens and rejected tokens
at runtime. Moreover, XGrammar further increases the cache hit
rate by introducing context expansion, which leverages the rule
reference structure in the grammar to further check and reject
context-dependent tokens.
With the optimization techniques, XGrammar can handle static
structured generation tasks well. However, XGrammar needs to
compile all the grammars ahead of time, which is not suitable
for dynamic structured generation tasks, since the grammars can
be sent to the engine at runtime. Thus, how to efficiently handle
dynamic structured generation tasks remains a challenge.
3 Methods
3.1 Overview
XGrammar-2 addresses dynamic agentic workloads with a uni-
fied design centered on first-class structural dispatching and fine-
grained reuse across dynamically changing grammars. TagDispatch
(Section 3.2) captures intra-request dynamism by expressing tag-
triggered switching between free-form text and structured sub-
grammars. Cross-grammar cache (Section 3.3) handles inter-request
dynamism by reusing token mask caches across grammars with
shared substructures. To support efficient execution on dynamic
and complex grammars, XGrammar-2 adopts an Earley-based adap-
tive token mask cache (Section 3.4) as the cache mechanism. JIT
compilation (Section 3.5) further amortizes cache construction over
decoding steps instead of materializing the full cache upfront. Rep-
etition state compression (Section 3.6) reduces runtime overhead
and improves robustness for recurring grammar patterns.
3.2 TagDispatch: Dynamic Dispatch Semantics
Intra-request dynamism: prior output determines subsequent struc-
tures. This requires free-formed text interleaved by structure con-
straints separated by certain triggers, such as a tool name or a
channel control token. Although this semantics can in principle
be encoded in plain EBNF, the encoding becomes cumbersome

--- PAGE 3 ---
XGrammar-2 : Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine for Agentic LLMs Under Review, Feb, 27
Prior LLM Output
Adaptive Cache
on Earley
Parser (§3.4)
Retrieve by
Sub-Structure
Current Parser State
Token Mask Cache
…
Token Mask Cache Pool
“+” • [0-9]
• “+” [0-9] “+” • [0-9]
• “+” [a-z] “+” • [a-z]
Cross-grammar Cache (§3.3)
Inter-request Dynamism
Token Mask Cache Accepted
Tokens
Rejected
Tokens
Uncertain Tokens
(Need to be Checked at Runtime)
Retrieve Token
Mask Cache
Token Mask
TagDispatch (§3.2)
Intra-request Dynamism Dispatching FSM
Dispatching Root
Grammar 1 Grammar 2 Grammar 3
Tag 1 Tag 2 Tag 3
Earley Parser State
A rule in the grammar.
The dot means the
current state postion.
TagDispatch(
    (Tag 1, Grammar 1),
    (Tag 2, Grammar 2),
    …
)
Parse
Other Optimizations
(§3.6)
Other
Characters
Compared by
Hash Value
The pool is initially
empty and
managed by JIT
compilation
system (§3.5).
Figure 2: Overview of our approach. We design a new dynamic dispatching semantics, TagDispatch (§3.2), to efficiently support
intra-request dynamism. To leverage the sub-structures across different grammars, we designed a cross-grammar caching
algorithm (§3.3) based on the Earley parser (§3.4) to handle inter-request dynamism. We also design a JIT compilation method
(§3.5) to optimize the efficiency for the inter-request dynamism. We also introduce a repetition state compression algorithm
(§3.6) to handle repetition structures.
and inefficient, since it must simultaneously accept arbitrary non-
tag text, recognize multiple tags, and route each tag to a different
sub-grammar.
To effectively express such structures, we introduce TagDispatch,
an EBNF-compatible grammar intrinsic to describing tag-triggered
switching between free-form text and structured sub-grammars. As
shown in Figure 3, a TagDispatch is parameterized by (i) a list of
tag–grammar pairs (𝑡𝑖, 𝐺𝑖 ), where emitting tag 𝑡𝑖 dispatches decod-
ing to sub-grammar 𝐺𝑖, and (ii) a set of stop stringsstop_strs that
terminate dispatching. Conceptually, TagDispatch partitions decod-
ing into two modes:dispatchinganddispatched. Decoding starts
in the dispatching mode, where the engine accepts ordinary text
while continuously matching registered tags. Once a tag is matched,
the engine switches to the dispatched mode and constrains subse-
quent decoding with the corresponding sub-grammar. After that
sub-grammar completes, decoding returns to the dispatching mode.
If a stop string is matched in the dispatching mode, TagDispatch
exits.
In the dispatching mode, we use an Aho–Corasick automaton
(AC automaton) [2] to match multiple tags simultaneously. The
automaton compiles all candidate tags into a single deterministic
finite automaton (DFA), enabling incremental matching over the
generated text. When a partial match fails, the automaton falls back
to a previously matched state and continues matching. This enables
efficient online trigger matching over free-form text.
TagDispatch can effectively describe agentic output structures.
For example, a snippet of LLM output with tool calling is OK, I
will call a tool. <function=get_weather>{"city":"San
Francisco"} </function> . The prefix<function=get_weather>
can be registered as a tag in TagDispatch, and dispatches decoding
to the JSON-argument grammar (and optional wrapper grammar)
associated with get_weather. After the dispatched grammar com-
pletes, TagDispatch returns to the dispatching mode, allowing the
model to continue generating free-form text or trigger another tag.
The same abstraction also applies to channelized outputs, where a
channel tag is followed by a channel-specific structure.
3.3 Cross-Grammar Cache
Different requests’ grammars often share some common sub-structures.
Even within a single grammar, some sub-structures are still du-
plicated. These repeated compilation leads to large overhead. To
leverage the token mask caches of these sub-structures, we design
aCross-Grammar Cacheto avoid recomputation.
In XGrammar-2, structures are represented as multiple FSMs.
Each FSM can have edges referring to another FSM to represent the

--- PAGE 4 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
TagDispatch Intrinsic
TagDispatch(
(“<function=”, grammar1),
(“<think>”, grammar2),
stop_strs = “end”
)
Dispatching
<
Other
Strings
Other
Characters
function= think>
grammar1 grammar2
𝜀 𝜀
Dispatched
end Quit Continuous
Matching
Figure 3: The definition and the constructed automata from
TagDispatch.
recursive structure in EBNF. To efficiently reuse the token mask
caches of the common sub-structures, we have two main challenges:
(1) How to detect the common substructures.We need to deter-
mine whether two FSMs are equivalent; since each FSM can
refer to other FSMs, the checker also needs to check the
referred FSM, and the reference structure may contain loops.
(2) How to reuse the token mask caches from other FSMs.In
XGrammar, the token mask cache not only considers FSM’s
structural information, but also how this FSM is referred to
by other FSMs to further increase cache hit rate (see context-
expansion in XGrammar paper). Even though the structure
of two FSM matches, the cache may not be simply reused
because they have different referencing structure. [9].
For the first challenge, we designed ahierarchical hash algo-
rithmfor FSMs to detect the same sub-structures. The algorithm
first processes FSMs with no rule-reference edges, then FSMs whose
references form an acyclic reference graph, and finally simple cycles
where each FSM has at most one reference into the cycle. With
the algorithm, we can maximally hash the FSMs and use the hash
values to detect the same sub-structures, and consistently number
the nodes of the FSM.
In our design, we perform a BFS based on the sorted edges, assign
these nodes with consistent state_ids, and hash the information,
including final states and edges. The algorithm is shown in 1.
FSM A
Lookahead y
FSM A
Lookahead x
Global Cache Pool
FSM A
Input
…
With Lookahead A
Without Lookahead
Perfect Cache Hit
Get the Cache Directly
Partial Cache Hit
Re-check
Uncertain Tokens
Figure 4: The perfect cache hit and the partial cache hit.
Algorithm 1FSM Hash Algorithm for roots of subtrees in FSM
Reference
Input:Finite state machine (FSM) 𝑓 𝑠𝑚 with edges 𝐸, final states
𝐹, and initial state 𝑠0. All the FSMs referred to by 𝑓 𝑠𝑚 have been
hashed.
Output:Hash Valueℎ
Initialize:Queue 𝑄← [𝑠 0 ], mapping from state to node ID
𝑀← {𝑠 0 : 0},ℎ←0
Const:A value 𝑘 to represent that the edge is a non-terminal
edge.
Sort all the terminal edges with the character range and the
target. Sort all the FSM reference edges with the hash value of
the FSM and the target.
while𝑄is not emptydo
𝑠←𝑄 .pop()
Visit(𝑠)
end while
functionVisit(FSM State𝑠)
ℎ←Hash(ℎ,[𝑠∈𝐹], 𝑘, 𝑘)
foreach edge𝑒in𝐸[𝑠]do
if𝑒.target is not in𝑀then
𝑀[𝑒.target] ← |𝑀|
𝑄 .push(𝑡)
end if
if𝑒is a terminal edgethen
ℎ←HashCombine(ℎ, 𝑒.lower_bound)
ℎ←HashCombine(ℎ, 𝑒.upper_bound)
else if𝑒is a rule referencethen
ℎ←HashCombine(ℎ, 𝑘, 𝑟𝑒 𝑓_𝑓 𝑠𝑚.hash)
else if𝑒is an epsilon edgethen
ℎ←HashCombine(ℎ, 𝑘, 𝑘)
end if
ℎ←HashCombine(ℎ, 𝑀[𝑒.target])
end for
end function
This algorithm will be applied to the FSMs hierarchically in the
order mentioned before. However, how to hash the FSMs in the
cycles remains a challenge. To address this problem, we design a
cycle hash algorithm to handle simple cycles (among each FSM’s
references, there is at most one FSM in the reference cycle). We will
assign a special value to the rule-reference edges with unhashed
FSMs, and then we can treat them as normal rule-reference edges.
Then, we can apply 1 on them as usual. Since in a simple cycle of the
FSM reference graph, each such edge points to the next FSM in the
cycle. Then, we can generate a hash value for the FSMs in the simple
cycle as all the FSM-referenced edges are assigned. However, these
FSMs’ hash values ignore the information cycle structure in the
FSM reference. To solve the problem, we need to apply Algorithm 2
to perform a cycle hash algorithm [13]. It will use the hash values
of the FSMs in the cycle in order to generate the different final
hash values for each FSM, which ensures the uniqueness of the
hash values. Because our hash_combine is non-commutative, each
FSM’s hash value is unique.

--- PAGE 5 ---
XGrammar-2 : Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine for Agentic LLMs Under Review, Feb, 27
For the second challenge, in the cross-grammar cache, with a
given rule with the FSM 𝐴, we will check if the token mask caches
for the same FSM have been computed Figure 4. If there is, then it
is a cache hit. If the rules share the same lookahead assertion, then
it is a perfect cache hit, and we can reuse the token mask cache
directly. Otherwise, it is a partial cache hit, and we need to recheck
all the uncertain tokens and the tokens that are validated by the
original lookahead assertion. Then, we add the new cache to the
global cache pool. In this method, most of the token mask cache
will be reused.
In summary, this cross-grammar cache can handle single FSMs,
FSMs forming a tree reference structure, and also FSMs forming a
graph with simple cycles, and maximize the cache reuse between
and within grammars.
3.4 Adaptive Token Mask Cache with Earley
Parsing
Prior works, such as XGrammar [ 9], use a token mask cache to
accelerate mask generation by preprocessing the majority of tokens
ahead of time. However, this design is tied to the state organization
of pushdown automata. Under non-deterministic grammars, the
number of PDA states can grow exponentially, which degrades both
grammar compilation and runtime mask generation. To preserve
the benefit of caching while improving efficiency on more complex
grammars, we build a new adaptive cache mechanism on top of
the Earley parser. This design inherits the cache-based accelera-
tion strategy of prior work, while leveraging the stronger parsing
efficiency of Earley parsing for complex context-free grammars.
The Earley parser [10] maintains, at each input position, a set of
partial parsing states. Each state records a production rule, a dot
position within that rule, and the input position where the matching
of this rule began. Together, these states define the current parsing
frontier. This state organization provides a natural foundation for
token-mask caching, while also requiring the cache to be defined
over Earley parsing frontiers rather than the state representation
used in PDA-based parsing.
Based on this observation, we design an adaptive token mask
cache mechanism for the Earley parser. The key idea is to cache to-
ken validity only for the part of the parsing frontier that can directly
affect the next decoding step. In Earley parsing, only scannable
states, i.e., states whose next symbol is a terminal, can immedi-
ately determine whether a token may be accepted. We therefore
construct caches only for these scannable states. Non-scannable
states, whose next symbol is a non-terminal, are not considered in
caching; instead, they will be expanded through Earley’s prediction
and completion operations into scannable states.
Regarding the cache content, we adapt XGrammar’s token mask
categorization to the Earley parser, categorizing tokens into ac-
cepted, rejected, and context-dependent cases. The first two cate-
gories can be determined by the current partial Earley parser state,
while the context-dependent tokens require the whole parsing state
history to be determined. At runtime, to compute the full token
mask, we first retrieve the mask cache with the current scannable
states, and then check the context-dependent tokens against the full
Earley context. This design reduces cache construction overhead,
enables effective cache reuse, and ensures efficient mask generation
for complex non-deterministic grammars.
3.5 JIT Compilation of Adaptive Token Mask
Cache
Prior efficient constrained decoding works, such as Outlines and
XGrammar, have a compilation stage that computes a token mask
cache for every possible state in the grammar. However, due to the
intra-request dynamism in agentic tasks, one request may allow
dozens or even hundreds of tools, resulting in a huge grammar that
is too expensive to compile at the beginning. To avoid the large
compilation overhead, we design aconfigurable JITcompilation
system to amortize the grammar compilation overhead over the
mask generation phase and avoid compilation for states that are
never used.
To achieve JIT compilation, we design a token mask cache pool
to store the generated token mask caches. This pool stores the cache
corresponding to each grammar state and is initially empty. Each
time we visit a new state, we will retrieve the pool for the state
with the hash algorithm described in Section 3.3. If cache hits, we
can reuse the token mask cache directly. Otherwise, we need to
generate the token mask cache at runtime and update the token
mask cache pool.
JIT compilation of the token mask cache amortizes computation
from compile time to runtime. Runtime computation is overlapped
with decoding, influencing per-token latency, while compilation is
overlapped with prefilling and influences the time to the first token.
We wish both to be hidden. It would be better hidden if we could
flexibly adjust the ratio of compile-time computation amortized to
runtime. Thus, we design the configurable JIT method to utilize the
time. During preprocessing, we will estimate the time to generate
the token mask cache for each state. Then, we will try to calculate𝐾
most time-consuming token mask, when the LLM is prefilling(𝐾 is
a fixed value, which is adjusted for the best performance). With this
method, we can overlap the time of prefilling and preprocessing,
and the time of decoding and mask generation well, achieving
zero-overhead token mask generation.
3.6 Repetition State Compression
Grammar
String → [^\”]{20,  1024}
Accept <1024 - k
characters … Accept 1022
characters
Accept 1024
characters
Expand the States and
Generate Token Mask Caches
Compress into One State Keep Uncompressed
Accept 1023
characters
Figure 5: Repetition State Compression.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
Repetition is widely used in grammar, especially in JSON schema.
Keywords like MinLength, MaxLength, MinItems, MaxItems ,
etc., will generate repetition structures. If we handle the repetition
structures trivially, then we need to generate a token mask cache
for each possible grammar state, which is linear to the repetition
times and time-consuming.
We design a repetition state compression algorithm to speed up
the process. The key insight is that in many cases, the differences
between states within a repetition are minimal, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 5, and we can compress the states, which bounds the size of the
grammar. Formally, for a rule R, we introduce a special construct
R{l, r} to describe the repetition structure. We require thatR must
consume at least one character to avoid repetition of zero length.
The parser state for R{l, r} is (R{l, r}, k) , where k denotes
the time that R has repeated.
We can divide the raw repetition structures into three cases: (1)
For R{l,r}, if r is small, then we expand the repetition structure as
usual, since the grammar size is small. (2) If both l and r are large,
then we can compress this structure. The structure will be further
transformed into a sequence of R{l - t,r - t} (t is a chosen
threshold constant) and t of the rule R. (3) If l is small, then we
divide the R{l, r} into R{l,t} and R{t, r} . Then, we can handle
each one in (1) and (2), respectively. The full algorithm is shown in
Algorithm 3.
After the repetition state compression algorithm, all the unex-
panded repetition structures will have a subsequence of t times
of the rule R. Thus, when generating token mask caches, we can
perceive the repetition structures as a single state thatonlyaccepts
sequences conforming to R{0, t + 1} , and it significantly reduces
the uncertainty of the token mask caches’ repetition structures. At
runtime, we use the k of (R{l, r}, k) to check the uncertain
tokens, which guarantees the correctness.
This method strikes a balance between the number of states and
the uncertainty of the token mask cache. The number of states
remains bounded by a constant, even for large repetition ranges,
which increases the efficiency and the robustness.
4 Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the efficiency and accuracy of XGrammar-
2 and compare XGrammar-2 with state-of-the-art structured gen-
eration engines. Our experiments are motivated by the following
questions:
• How to quantify the dynamism in agentic tasks, and how
does it affect the efficiency of structured generation? (§4.1)
• Can XGrammar-2 handle grammar compilation and mask
generation efficiently? (§4.2)
• Can XGrammar-2 achieve minimal overhead for end-to-end
function calling in LLM serving? (§4.3)
• How effective is each optimization technique introduced in
XGrammar-2? (§4.4)
• Can XGrammar-2 work correctly to constrain the LLMs’
outputs in agentic tasks? (§4.5)
For experiments focusing on the efficiency of token mask gen-
eration (§4.1, §4.2, §4.4, §E), we use an AMD EPYC 9654 processor.
For the end-to-end experiment (§4.3), the setup includes an Nvidia
RTX 5090 GPU and an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8470Q CPU. For
accuracy evaluation (§4.5), we utilize an Nvidia B200 GPU and an
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8570 CPU. The software versions are as
follows: XGrammar, v0.1.19; llguidance, v1.2.0; Outlines, v0.2.11;
and SGLang, v0.5.3.post3. All mask generation engines are run with
a single thread.
4.1 Quantifying Dynamism in Agentic Tasks
In this section, we quantify the dynamism in agentic tasks and
justify the necessity of abstractions and optimizations introduced
in this work, especially the TagDispatch intrinsic and the Cross-
grammar Cache.
Inter-request Dynamism.The main challenge for inter-request
dynamism is that different requests often require different struc-
tures, making full-grammar reuse ineffective. We therefore quantify
both whole-grammar overlap and reusable substructure overlap
across requests.
We choose a tool pool of 100 distinct tools from BFCL [27] and
construct two scenarios, each containing 100 requests. In thestatic
setting, every request uses the same 5, 20, or 50 tools to build the
grammar. In thedynamicsetting, each request samples 5, 20, or 50
tools uniformly at random from the tool pool. For each setting, we
measure the reuse rate of full structures and substructures across
requests, and report grammar compilation time in Figure 6.
As shown in Table 1, inter-request dynamism significantly re-
duces the reuse of complete grammar structures in the dynamic
setting. In contrast, substructure reuse remains much higher, in-
dicating that although full grammars change frequently across
requests, many underlying components can still be reused. This
suggests that reuse opportunities exist primarily below the whole-
grammar level. Figure 6 further shows that, in the dynamic setting,
XGrammar’s compilation cost increases rapidly with the number of
tools due to the lack of fine-grained cache, whereas XGrammar-2
scales much more gently with the cross-grammar cache.
Overall, inter-request dynamism makes whole-grammar reuse
ineffective, since complete grammars change frequently across re-
quests. At the same time, substantial reusable substructures remain,
motivating cross-grammar reuse for efficient structured generation.
Intra-request Dynamism.The main challenge for intra-request
dynamism is handling free-form text together with tag-triggered
dynamic structures within a single request, which is cumbersome
to express in EBNF and difficult to scale.
To quantify this complexity, we consider a natural construc-
tion of plain EBNF dispatching: we first build an Aho–Corasick
automaton for tag matching and then translate it into EBNF. In this
translation, each automaton node corresponds to a rule, and each
transition corresponds to a rule reference. We therefore record the
number of automaton states, the number of automaton transitions,
and the size of the resulting EBNF to reflect the amount of grammar
structure needed to encode the dispatching logic.
As shown in Table 2, both the automaton size and the result-
ing EBNF size grow rapidly as the number of tags increases. This
indicates that implementing dispatching through plain EBNF be-
comes increasingly cumbersome and scales poorly. In contrast,
TagDispatch represents the dispatch structure directly, making the
implementation much clearer and more compact.

--- PAGE 7 ---
XGrammar-2 : Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine for Agentic LLMs Under Review, Feb, 27
Total Tool
Number
Structure Reuse Rate (%) Substructure Reuse Rate (%)
Static Dynamic Static Dynamic
5 99.0 0 99.1 42.7
20 99.0 0 99.1 51.7
50 99.0 0 99.2 50.7
Table 1: Structure and substructure reuse rate for static and
dynamic workloads. Dynamic workloads fail to reuse the
full structure, but can effectively reuse substructures.
5 20 50
T otal T ool Number
10 1
100
101
102
103
104
Grammar Compilation Time (ms)
28.64
66.50
157.64
2175.8
7018.9
16581.2
0.59 0.84
1.31
16.07 22.73
42.37
Grammar Compilation Time by T otal T ool Number
XGrammar static
XGrammar dynamic
XGrammar-2 static
XGrammar-2 dynamic
Figure 6: Average Grammar compilation time for static and
dynamic workloads. Dynamic workloads significantly in-
crease compile time.
#Tags Total Length of Tags AC#𝑆 AC#𝐸 EBNF Size
5 50 50 98 341
20 200 197 392 1356
50 500 477 952 3299
100 1000 942 1882 6529
Table 2: Measured sizes of the naturally constructed EBNF
grammar. AC #S means the number of states in the AC Au-
tomaton; AC #E is the number of transitions in the AC Au-
tomaton.
4.2 Grammar Processing Efficiency
In this section, we will evaluate the efficiency of grammar compi-
lation and mask generation among several structured generation
engines. We evaluate two major structures for agent tasks: function
calling and response protocols are common scenarios for dynamic
structured generation.
In this part, we choose CONFETTI [3] as our dataset. CONFETTI
provides a collection of functions and ground-truth contexts for
large language models, consisting of both natural language text and
function calls. This dataset effectively simulates real-world function-
calling scenarios. We modify the dataset to two common formats:
Llama’s tool calling format and OpenAI Harmony Response Format.
The results are shown in Figure 7, Figure 8.
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Cumulative Distribution Function
101
102
103
Time (us)
Per-token-mask Generation Time(Llama's T ool Calling Format)
llguidance
XGrammar
XGrammar-2
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Cumulative Distribution Function
101
102
103
Time (us)
Per-token-mask Generation Time(OpenAI Harmony Response Format)
llguidance
XGrammar
XGrammar-2
Figure 7: Average Per-token Overhead in Llama’s Tool Calling
Format and OpenAI Harmony Response Format.
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Cumulative Distribution Function
101
102
103
104
Time (ms)
Grammar Compilation Time(Llama's T ool Calling Format)
llguidance
XGrammar
XGrammar-2
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Cumulative Distribution Function
101
102
103
104
Time (ms)
Grammar Compilation Time(OpenAI Harmony Response Format)
llguidance
XGrammar
XGrammar-2
Figure 8: Compilation Time in Llama’s Tool Calling Format
and OpenAI Harmony Response Format.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
The results show that XGrammar-2 has an advantage in per-
token overhead, while llguidance has about 250 us per-token over-
head with OpenAI Harmony Response Format and a more than 1000
us per-token overhead with Llama’s Tool Calling Format. XGram-
mar also performs well on per-token overhead. However, for dy-
namic structured generation tasks, mask generation engines cannot
know all the grammar at the very beginning. It will introduce huge
overhead if the engine needs a long compilation time. The results
of compilation time show that XGrammar-2 has a compilation time
of about 10 ms, while XGrammar needs more than 1000 ms to com-
pile. XGrammar-2 performs well on both per-token overhead and
compilation time, which demonstrates that XGrammar-2 shows
superior performance in grammar execution.
4.3 End-to-end LLM Engine Evaluation
The results in §4.2 demonstrate that XGrammar-2 shows superior
performance in grammar execution. In this section, we evaluate
the overhead introduced by constrained decoding in real-world
settings and examine whether our method achieves low-overhead
structured generation for dynamic structured generation. We adopt
BFCL-v3[27] as the dataset. BFCL-v3 is a dataset consisting of com-
binations of tools and prompts, which can be used to measure
models’ ability to call functions. Thus, we can apply structured
generation engines on the models to stimulate the real serving
scenarios. We use Qwen-0.6B, Llama3.2-1B, Llama3.2-3B-Instruct,
and Llama3.1-8B as the test models, and run the test with SGLang.
SgLang-v0.5.3.post3 with Outlines-v0.2.11 cannot support dynamic
structured generation like tool-calling. SgLang-v0.5.3.post3 with
llguidance-v1.2.0 can support dynamic structured generation, but it
results in empty outputs for Qwen3-0.6B and induces language drift
from pure English to other languages in Llama3.1-8B. The results
are shown in Figure 9 and Table 3.
Qwen3-0.6B Llama3.2-1B Llama3.2-3B Llama3.1-8B
Model
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500Latency (ms)
235.31
286.01
463.08
1276.29
1662.05
1291.99
1441.20
2258.77
314.19
506.80
249.88
297.48
466.83
1296.36
End-to-end Average Latency per Request (per Model)
Without Constraints
XGrammar
llguidance
XGrammar-2
Figure 9: End-to-end Function Calling Latency.
The results in Figure 9 show that compared to XGrammar, XGrammar-
2 has about a 7x speedup over the end-to-end latency, and also a
larger total token throughput. Besides, the gap between the re-
sult of XGrammar-2 and the result without constraints is no more
than 6%. Compared with llguidance, XGrammar-2 shows a small
latency and better compatibility. The output token throughput in Ta-
ble 3 also shows that XGrammar-2 is superior to XGrammar. This
demonstrates that XGrammar-2 can support dynamic structured
generation efficiently.
Model Name Type Batch Size
1 16 128
Qwen3-0.6B XGrammar 462 1712 3021
XGrammar-2 599 4287 9475
Llama-3.2-1B XGrammar 274 861 1147
XGrammar-2 441 2933 6640
Llama-3.2-3B XGrammar 139 597 791
XGrammar-2 184 1655 3830
Llama-3.1-8B XGrammar 83 525 738
XGrammar-2 96 920 1938
Table 3: The output token throughput (token/s) With Differ-
ent Models and Batch Size.
4.4 Ablation Study of Optimization Techniques
In this section, we further investigate the efficiency improvements
brought by our various optimizations to better illustrate the reasons
for our design decisions. We start with a baseline implementation
using the Earley parser and without any of the optimizations. Based
on the baseline, we incrementally apply the proposed optimizations,
namely JIT compilation, cross-grammar cache, and repetition state
compression. We choose JSONSchemaBench [ 11] as the dataset.
JSONSchemaBench collects about 11k JSON Schemas from about 20
lines to more than 200k lines. This dataset can be used to measure
each optimization technique from multiple angles.
Table 4: Ablation study of optimization techniques.
Optimization preprocessing time to generate
time(𝑚𝑠) the mask(𝜇𝑠)
Baseline 4960.04 45.50
↓
+JIT 612.07 722.47
↓(8.1×↓) (15.9×↑)
+ Cross-grammar 534.80 333.75
Cache (1.1×↓) (2.2×↓)
↓
+Repetition State 5.37 126.49
Compression (99.6×↓) (2.6×↓)
The results show that JIT serves as a general optimization tech-
nique that substantially improves preprocessing time, although it in-
troduces additional overhead to generate the mask. Cross-Grammar
Caching can generally reduce the time to generate the mask to an
acceptable level. Besides, Repetition Compression achieves signifi-
cant improvements on some long-tail cases.
We also want to measure the advantages of the Earley Parser as
an ablation study. Thus, we evaluate the efficiency of XGrammar-2,
with PDA based parser and the Earley Parser, respectively, and both
of them will compile the JSON schemas ahead of time. The dataset
is JSONSchemaBench [11], and the result in Figure 10 shows that
the Earley Parser can significantly reduce the grammar compilation.

--- PAGE 9 ---
XGrammar-2 : Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine for Agentic LLMs Under Review, Feb, 27
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cumulative Distribution Function
0.01
0.10
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
100,000
1,000,000Time (ms)
JSON Schema Compilation Time
PDA Version
Earley Parser Version
Figure 10: Comparison between the Earley Parser and PDA
on JSONSchemaBench.
Note that the long-tail is caused by the huge inputs, instead of the
complexity of the algorithm.
4.5 Correctness and Task-level Effectiveness
By construction, constrained decoding guarantees that generated
outputs conform to the target structure (e.g., JSON schema or tool-
calling format). XGrammar-2 preserves the same constraint se-
mantics as XGrammar, and thus both achieve 100% schema-valid
tool-call arguments whenever a tool call is produced; the difference
is efficiency (Section 4.3).
Model Name Type Correct
Call Rate
Correct
Schema Rate
Llama-3.2-1B w/o XGrammar-2 6.07% 22.07%
w/ XGrammar-2 32.84% 100.00%
Llama-3.2-3B w/o XGrammar-2 33.12% 40.70%
w/ XGrammar-2 77.75% 100.00%
Llama-3.1-8B w/o XGrammar-2 59.48% 66.95%
w/ XGrammar-2 80.93% 100.00%
Llama-3.1-70B w/o XGrammar-2 45.60% 51.94%
w/ XGrammar-2 86.41% 100.00%
Table 5: The function calling accuracy rate and the JSON
schema validity rate.
To validate end-to-end correctness and quantify task-level im-
pact in realistic agent settings, we evaluate on BFCL-v3 [ 27]. As
shown in Table 5, grammar-constrained decoding (XGrammar-2)
substantially improves BFCL function-calling outcomes for most
models, primarily by eliminating malformed tool calls (e.g., invalid
JSON or schema violations) that would otherwise be unexecutable
and scored as failures. Constraint enforcement can also narrow the
gap between small and large models; for example, XGrammar-2 en-
ables Llama-3.2-3B to outperform an unconstrained Llama-3.1-70B
baseline on BFCL.
5 Related Work
Several works focus on LLMs’ structured generation. In the very
beginning, [35] proposed a new architecture to guide the output of
models with pre-defined rules. PICARD[30] designs an algorithm
to parse incrementally for Constrained Auto-Regressive decoding
from language models. [22] proposes controlled decoding for align-
ment of LLMs. [31] explores utilizing prompts to specify the LLMs’
generation structure. [5, 18, 29] design finetuning technologies for
higher quality structured generation. XGrammar-2 is orthogonal
to these methods, and can be easily combined with them to better
support structured generation.
Several frameworks have been proposed to support constrained
decoding. Outlines [33] designs an FSM-based lexer and parser, and
it caches several of the most common lexer tokens to speed up. How-
ever, when the LLMs output contains multiple lexemes, the caching
algorithm cannot perform well. XGrammar [9] utilizes pushdown
automata as the parsing backend, and it caches all the token mask
caches in advance for better performance at runtime. However, it
will suffer from a long compilation time in dynamic structured gen-
eration. llguidance [12] employs an Earley parser to parse the prior
LLM output, and it applies a series of optimization algorithms to
reduce per-token latency. But it targets specific JSON structures and
has not yet generalized well to dynamic structured generation in
agentic tool-calling use cases. WGRAMMAR [32] provides a struc-
tural template to reuse the token mask caches in the template to
accelerate. But it has not generalized it to all similar grammar struc-
tures. XGrammar-2 builds on top and complements these previous
approaches by enabling dynamic structured generation through
tag dispatch, JIT-based cross-grammar cache mechanism, Earley
parser, and the token mask cache.
Several LLM serving engines [ 14, 17, 21, 37] employ different
techniques to support efficient LLM generation for multiple con-
current users. They design various techniques such as continuous
batching [36] for dynamic request scheduling, low-level KV cache
technique PagedKVCache [17] for efficient memory management,
and [34] for a more customizable and efficient attention engine.
These LLM serving engines can leverage XGrammar-2 for more
efficient dynamic structured generation.
6 Conclusion
We proposed XGrammar-2, an efficient structured generation en-
gine for LLMs’ dynamic structured generation tasks. We designed
a dynamic dispatching semantics to efficiently support dynamic
structured generation. Additionally, we designed a cross-grammar
caching mechanism based on the Earley parser. We also introduce
just-in-time (JIT) compilation for token mask caching, building
upon the work of XGrammar. Finally, we design a repetition com-
pression algorithm to handle several long-tail cases. Experimental
results demonstrate that XGrammar-2 supports dynamic structured
generation tasks with near-zero overhead. We hope that XGrammar-
2 can significantly enhance the efficiency of dynamic structured
generation tasks.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by Bosch and gifts from NVIDIA
and Google. We also acknowledge the support of DGX B200 from

--- PAGE 10 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
NVIDIA. We would also like to thank, listed alphabetically, Databricks,
the SGLang team, the TensorRT-LLM team, the vLLM team, and
xAI, as well as Yi Wang, Xinyu Yang, Jieyu Zhang, Wenxin Zheng,
and Ligeng Zhu, for their insightful feedback.
References
[1] 1996. Information technology — Syntactic metalanguage — Extended BNF.
[2] Alfred V. Aho and Margaret J. Corasick. 1975. Efficient string matching: an aid
to bibliographic search.Commun. ACM18, 6 (June 1975), 333–340. doi:10.1145/
360825.360855
[3] Tamer Alkhouli, Katerina Margatina, James Gung, Raphael Shu, Claudia Zaghi,
Monica Sunkara, and Yi Zhang. 2025. CONFETTI: Conversational Function-
Calling Evaluation Through Turn-Level Interactions. arXiv:2506.01859 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.01859
[4] John Bridle. 1989. Training Stochastic Model Recognition Algorithms as Net-
works can Lead to Maximum Mutual Information Estimation of Parameters. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, D. Touretzky (Ed.), Vol. 2.
Morgan-Kaufmann. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/1989/file/
0336dcbab05b9d5ad24f4333c7658a0e-Paper.pdf
[5] Sahil Chaudhary. 2023. Code Alpaca: An Instruction-following LLaMA model
for code generation. https://github.com/sahil280114/codealpaca.
[6] N. Chomsky. 1956. Three models for the description of language.IRE Transactions
on Information Theory2, 3 (1956), 113–124. doi:10.1109/TIT.1956.1056813
[7] DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu
Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang
Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li,
Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda Lu,
Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Deli
Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao,
Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang,
Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li, Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li,
Jiawei Wang, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi
Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang,
Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang,
Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Meng Li,
Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng
Wang, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji
Wang, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruyi Chen, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang
Chen, Shengfeng Ye, Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, S. S.
Li, Shuang Zhou, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun,
T. Wang, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao,
Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang, W. L. Xiao, Wei An, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang,
Xiaokang Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xinyu
Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xiaojin Shen,
Xiaosha Chen, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Xianzu
Wang, Xinxia Shan, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu,
Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi,
Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan
Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yuan Ou, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He,
Yunfan Xiong, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Y. X. Zhu,
Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yaohui Li, Yi Zheng, Yuchen Zhu, Yunxian Ma,
Ying Tang, Yukun Zha, Yuting Yan, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu,
Zhean Xu, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang
Yan, Zhiyu Wu, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song,
Zizheng Pan, Zhen Huang, Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, and Zhen Zhang. 2025.
DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement
Learning. arXiv:2501.12948 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948
[8] Daniel Deutsch, Shyam Upadhyay, and Dan Roth. 2019. A General-Purpose
Algorithm for Constrained Sequential Inference. InProceedings of the 23rd Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), Mohit Bansal and
Aline Villavicencio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong,
China, 482–492. doi:10.18653/v1/K19-1045
[9] Yixin Dong, Charlie F Ruan, Yaxing Cai, Ruihang Lai, Ziyi Xu, Yilong Zhao, and
Tianqi Chen. 2024. Xgrammar: Flexible and efficient structured generation engine
for large language models.Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 7(2024).
[10] Jay Earley. 1970. An efficient context-free parsing algorithm.Commun. ACM13,
2 (1970), 94–102. doi:10.1145/362007.362035
[11] Saibo Geng, Hudson Cooper, Michał Moskal, Samuel Jenkins, Julian Berman,
Nathan Ranchin, Robert West, Eric Horvitz, and Harsha Nori. 2025. Gen-
erating Structured Outputs from Language Models: Benchmark and Studies.
arXiv:2501.10868 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.10868
[12] Guidance-ai. 2024. GitHub - guidance-ai/llguidance: Super-fast Structured Out-
puts — github.com. https://github.com/guidance-ai/llguidance. [Accessed 13-10-
2025].
[13] Caleb Helbling. 2020. Directed Graph Hashing.CoRRabs/2002.06653 (2020).
arXiv:2002.06653 https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06653
[14] hiworldwzj, shihaobai, sufubao, WANDY666, FlyingFlame, llehtahw, LiangLiu,
wxd000000, fuheaven, XHPlus, Chielo, Yang Yong, and_gate, sangchengmeng,
wangzhihong, singularity, Shuo Yang, Wu SiYu, Tracin, Elsa Granger, Hamel
Husain, S A G A R, SunXiaoye, Tao Peng, Uranus, Yunfeng Bai, Yunqian Fan,
bingo, liuhuakai, and XFPlus. 2024.ModelTC/lightllm. https://github.com/
ModelTC/lightllm
[15] Michael Kuchnik, Virginia Smith, and George Amvrosiadis. 2023. Validating
large language models with relm.Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems5
(2023), 457–476.
[16] Dominik Kundel. 2025. OpenAI Harmony Response Format. https://cookbook.
openai.com/articles/openai-harmony/. Accessed: 2025-10-27.
[17] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng,
Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient Mem-
ory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles.
[18] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov,
Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, Qian Liu,
Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Terry Yue Zhuo, Thomas Wang, Olivier Dehaene, Mishig
Davaadorj, Joel Lamy-Poirier, João Monteiro, Oleh Shliazhko, Nicolas Gontier,
Nicholas Meade, Armel Zebaze, Ming-Ho Yee, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, Jian Zhu,
Benjamin Lipkin, Muhtasham Oblokulov, Zhiruo Wang, Rudra Murthy, Jason
Stillerman, Siva Sankalp Patel, Dmitry Abulkhanov, Marco Zocca, Manan Dey,
Zhihan Zhang, Nour Fahmy, Urvashi Bhattacharyya, Wenhao Yu, Swayam Singh,
Sasha Luccioni, Paulo Villegas, Maxim Kunakov, Fedor Zhdanov, Manuel Romero,
Tony Lee, Nadav Timor, Jennifer Ding, Claire Schlesinger, Hailey Schoelkopf, Jan
Ebert, Tri Dao, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Jennifer Robinson, Carolyn Jane Ander-
son, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, Danish Contractor, Siva Reddy, Daniel Fried, Dzmitry
Bahdanau, Yacine Jernite, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf,
Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm de Vries. 2023. StarCoder: may the
source be with you! arXiv:2305.06161 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06161
[19] Meta-AI. 2024. Tool calling with Llama. https://www.llama.com/resources/
cookbook/toolcalling-with-llama/. Accessed: 2025-10-27.
[20] Microsoft. 2026.What is Foundry Agent Service?Microsoft. https://learn.
microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-foundry/agents/overview Accessed: 2026-02-22;
Microsoft Learn documentation on Azure AI Foundry Agent Service overview.
[21] MLC team. 2023. MLC-LLM. https://github.com/mlc-ai/mlc-llm
[22] Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yan-
ping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman,
Jilin Chen, Alex Beutel, and Ahmad Beirami. 2024. Controlled Decoding from
Language Models. arXiv:2310.17022 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17022
[23] Andreas Opedal, Ran Zmigrod, Tim Vieira, Ryan Cotterell, and Jason Eisner.
2023. Efficient Semiring-Weighted Earley Parsing. arXiv:2307.02982 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02982
[24] OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Apple-
baum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz
Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman,
Sebastien Bubeck, Che Chang, Kai Chen, Mark Chen, Enoch Cheung, Aidan Clark,
Dan Cook, Marat Dukhan, Casey Dvorak, Kevin Fives, Vlad Fomenko, Timur
Garipov, Kristian Georgiev, Mia Glaese, Tarun Gogineni, Adam Goucher, Lukas
Gross, Katia Gil Guzman, John Hallman, Jackie Hehir, Johannes Heidecke, Alec
Helyar, Haitang Hu, Romain Huet, Jacob Huh, Saachi Jain, Zach Johnson, Chris
Koch, Irina Kofman, Dominik Kundel, Jason Kwon, Volodymyr Kyrylov, Elaine Ya
Le, Guillaume Leclerc, James Park Lennon, Scott Lessans, Mario Lezcano-Casado,
Yuanzhi Li, Zhuohan Li, Ji Lin, Jordan Liss, Lily, Liu, Jiancheng Liu, Kevin Lu,
Chris Lu, Zoran Martinovic, Lindsay McCallum, Josh McGrath, Scott McKin-
ney, Aidan McLaughlin, Song Mei, Steve Mostovoy, Tong Mu, Gideon Myles,
Alexander Neitz, Alex Nichol, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Dana Palmie, Ashley
Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Jongsoo Park, Leher Pathak, Carolina
Paz, Ludovic Peran, Dmitry Pimenov, Michelle Pokrass, Elizabeth Proehl, Huida
Qiu, Gaby Raila, Filippo Raso, Hongyu Ren, Kimmy Richardson, David Robinson,
Bob Rotsted, Hadi Salman, Suvansh Sanjeev, Max Schwarzer, D. Sculley, Harshit
Sikchi, Kendal Simon, Karan Singhal, Yang Song, Dane Stuckey, Zhiqing Sun,
Philippe Tillet, Sam Toizer, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Nikhil Vyas, Eric Wallace, Xin
Wang, Miles Wang, Olivia Watkins, Kevin Weil, Amy Wendling, Kevin Whin-
nery, Cedric Whitney, Hannah Wong, Lin Yang, Yu Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga,
Kristen Ying, Wojciech Zaremba, Wenting Zhan, Cyril Zhang, Brian Zhang, Ed-
die Zhang, and Shengjia Zhao. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b Model Card.
arXiv:2508.10925 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925
[25] OpenAI Help Center. 2025. Apps in ChatGPT. https://help.openai.com/en/articles/
11487775-apps-in-chatgpt. https://help.openai.com/en/articles/11487775-apps-
in-chatgpt Accessed: 2026-02-27.
[26] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of
Human Behavior. InIn the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology (UIST ’23)(San Francisco, CA, USA)(UIST ’23). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.

--- PAGE 11 ---
XGrammar-2 : Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine for Agentic LLMs Under Review, Feb, 27
[27] Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Fanjia Yan, Vishnu Suresh, Ion
Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2025. The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard
(BFCL): From Tool Use to Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models. In
Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning.
[28] Qwen. 2024. Function Calling – Qwen. https://qwen.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
framework/function_call.html. Accessed: 2025-10-27.
[29] Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiao-
qing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, Jérémy
Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cris-
tian Canton Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre Défossez, Jade
Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier, Thomas
Scialom, and Gabriel Synnaeve. 2024. Code Llama: Open Foundation Models for
Code. arXiv:2308.12950 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12950
[30] Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. 2021. PICARD:
Parsing Incrementally for Constrained Auto-Regressive Decoding from Language
Models. arXiv:2109.05093 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.05093
[31] Bailin Wang, Zi Wang, Xuezhi Wang, Yuan Cao, Rif A. Saurous, and Yoon Kim.
2023. Grammar Prompting for Domain-Specific Language Generation with Large
Language Models. arXiv:2305.19234 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19234
[32] Ran Wang, Xiaoxuan Liu, Hao Ren, Gang Chen, Fanchao Qi, and Maosong
Sun. 2025. WGRAMMAR: Leverage Prior Knowledge to Accelerate Structured
Decoding. arXiv:2507.16768 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16768
[33] Brandon T. Willard and Rémi Louf. 2023. Efficient Guided Generation for Large
Language Models. arXiv:2307.09702 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09702
[34] Zihao Ye, Lequn Chen, Ruihang Lai, Wuwei Lin, Yineng Zhang, Stephanie Wang,
Tianqi Chen, Baris Kasikci, Vinod Grover, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Luis Ceze.
2025. FlashInfer: Efficient and Customizable Attention Engine for LLM Inference
Serving. arXiv:2501.01005 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.01005
[35] Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. 2017. A Syntactic Neural Model for General-
Purpose Code Generation. arXiv:1704.01696 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.
01696
[36] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and Byung-
Gon Chun. 2022. Orca: A Distributed Serving System for Transformer-Based
Generative Models. In16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 22). USENIX Association, Carlsbad, CA, 521–538. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/yu
[37] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang,
Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark
Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: Efficient Execution of Structured Lan-
guage Model Programs. arXiv:2312.07104 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07104
A The Hash Algorithm for Simple Cycle
Structure
Algorithm 2 is the algorithm to hash the FSMs in a simple cycle
structure.
B The Algorithm for Repetition State
Compression
Algorithm 3 shows the algorithm to perform repetition state com-
pression algorithm in detail.
Algorithm 2Handle Simple Cycle Structure in FSM Reference
Input:List of local hash values of simple-cycle FSMs𝐿
Output:List of final hash values of simple-cycle FSMs𝐻
Initialize:𝐻← [ ]
for𝑖in range(|𝐿|)do
ℎ←0
for𝑗in range(|𝐿|)do
ℎ←Hash(ℎ, 𝐿[(𝑖+𝑗)mod|𝐿|])
end for
𝐻 .push(ℎ)
end for
Algorithm 3Repetition State Compression Algorithm
Input:A triplet(𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡)
Output:A expression𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟
Const:𝑘𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑←𝑡
if𝑚𝑎𝑥≤𝑡then
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟←Expand(𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡)
return
end if
if𝑚𝑖𝑛<𝑡then
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟_𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠←Expand(𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑡, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡)
𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒←Concat(Repeat(𝑡, 𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡),
Expand(0, 𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑡, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡))
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟←Union(𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟_𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠)
return
end if
for𝑖∈range(𝑡)do
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟←Concat(𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡)
end for
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟←Concat(𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟,Repeat(𝑚𝑖𝑛−𝑡, 𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑡, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡))
functionRepeat(𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡)
returna repetition expression that accepts 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡 at least
𝑚𝑖𝑛times and at most𝑚𝑎𝑥times
end function
functionExpand(𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡)
returnan explicit expansion equivalent to the repetition ex-
pression
end function
functionUnion(𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 1, 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 2)
returnan expression that matches either𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 1 or𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 2
end function
functionConcat(𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 1, 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 2)
returnan expression that matches𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 1 followed by𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟 2
end function
C More Explanation of the Hash Algorithm
For most FSMs, this algorithm generates a consistent hash value.
However, there are two cases where it may produce different hash
values for FSMs with the same structure: (1) the FSM is not a de-
terministic finite automaton (DFA); (2) there are duplicated FSMs
in the grammars, and they are referenced by a common FSM. In
these cases, the algorithm may generate inconsistent hash values.
Nevertheless, this does not undermine the sufficiency of the algo-
rithm: if two FSMs share the same hash value, they must have the
same structure. In addition, in our implementation, we attempt
to transform most FSMs into DFAs. Moreover, since we have a
deterministic conversion function for JSON Schemas and regular
expressions, two FSMs with the same structure are likely to produce
the same hash value due to this deterministic transformation. As
a result, we can detect and reuse identical structures within and
across grammars maximally.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
D Formal Definitions of the Earley Parser and
the Token Mask Generation with Cache
Table 6 shows the formal definition of the Earley Parser, and the
formal definition of the token mask generation with cache.

--- PAGE 13 ---
XGrammar-2 : Efficient Dynamic Structured Generation Engine for Agentic LLMs Under Review, Feb, 27
Earley Parser Token Mask Generation with Cache
InputString𝑥, Length𝑁, Start Symbol𝑆,InputVocabularyV
Grammar ProductionsP
VariablesIndices𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘∈ [𝑁],Token Mask Cache[∗,∗, 𝐴→𝜇 • 𝑎𝜈] → ( A,R,U )
Non-terminals𝐴, 𝐵,A,R,U ⊂ V, 𝐴⊔ R ⊔ U=V
Sequences𝜇, 𝜈, 𝜌, Terminal𝑎∈Σ,
Augmented Start Symbol𝑆 ′
State[𝑖, 𝑗, 𝐴→𝜇 • 𝜈]AcceptedA={𝑣∈𝑉:∃ [∗,|𝑣|,∗]
derived from[0,0, 𝐴→ •𝑎𝜇]and input𝑣}
Initialize[0,0, 𝑆 ′ → •𝑆]UncertainU={𝑣∈𝑉\ A:∃𝑖<|𝑣|,[0, 𝑖, 𝐴→𝑎𝜈 •]
derived from[0,0, 𝐴→ •𝑎𝜈]and input𝑣 0:𝑖 }
Goal[0, 𝑁 , 𝑆 ′ →𝑆 •]RejectedR=𝑉\ ( A ∪ U )
Rules Generate Token Mask(At runtime):
①Predict Rule [𝑖, 𝑗, 𝐴→𝜇 • 𝐵 𝜈] (𝐵→𝜌) ∈ P
[𝑗, 𝑗, 𝐵→ •𝜌] ①Retrieve Token Mask
Cache
( A,R,U )from state[𝑖, 𝑗, 𝐴→𝜇 • 𝑎𝜈]
②Scan Rule [𝑖, 𝑗, 𝐴→𝜇 • 𝑎 𝜈]𝑥 𝑗 =𝑎
[𝑖, 𝑘, 𝐴→𝜇 𝑎 • 𝜈] ②Check UncertainU A ={𝑣∈ U:∃ [∗, 𝑗+ |𝑣|,∗]
derived from[𝑖, 𝑗, 𝐴→𝜇 • 𝜈]and input𝑣}
UR =U \ U A
③Complete
Rule
[𝑗, 𝑗, 𝐵→ •𝜌] [𝑗, 𝑘, 𝐵→𝜌 • ]
[𝑖, 𝑘, 𝐴→𝜇 𝐵 • 𝜈] ③Output Token Mask( A ′,R ′ ),A ′ =A ∪ U A,R ′ =R ∪ U R
Table 6: Formal definitions of the Earley parser[23] and the token mask generation with cache.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Under Review, Feb, 27 Linzhang Li, Yixin Dong, Guanjie Wang, Ziyi Xu, Alexander Jiang, and Tianqi Chen
E Mask Generation Efficiency on JSON Schemas
Although this paper focuses on dynamic structure generation in
agentic use cases, it is still interesting to see how XGrammar-2
performs on generations with pre-defined static JSON schemas.
The dataset in JSONSchemaBench [11]. The results are in Figure 11.
XGrammar-2 can also perform well on static structured genera-
tion tasks. Additionally, XGrammar-2 brings improved grammar
compilation time to compile most JSON Schemas within 1 ms.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cumulative Distribution Function
0.01
0.10
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
100,000
1,000,000Time (ms)
JSON Schema Compilation Time
llguidance
XGrammar
Outlines
XGrammar-2
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Cumulative Distribution Function
1
10
100
1,000
10,000Time (us)
Per-token-mask Generation Time in JSON format
llguidance
XGrammar
Outlines
XGrammar-2
Figure 11: JSONSchemaBench.
