Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. Dismiss alert {{ message }} openai / codex Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 9.6k Star 69.8k bwrap: Approval prompt shown for almost every command #14936 New issue Copy link New issue Copy link Open Open bwrap: Approval prompt shown for almost every command #14936 Copy link Labels bug Something isn't working Something isn't working regression Behaviors that worked in previous versions but were broken due to an update Behaviors that worked in previous versions but were broken due to an update sandbox Issues related to permissions or sandboxing Issues related to permissions or sandboxing Description nsrisakolkit opened on Mar 17, 2026 Issue body actions What version of Codex CLI is running? CLI 0.115.0 What subscription do you have? GPT Plus Which model were you using? gpt-5.3-codex medium What platform is your computer? Linux 6.17.0-19-generic x86_64 x86_64 What terminal emulator and version are you using (if applicable)? No response What issue are you seeing? After upgrading to codex-cli 0.115.0, Codex CLI prompts for approval on alomost every command, including safe read-only commands (e.g. find, sed, ls). Approval decisions such as “don’t ask again” are not persisted, causing repeated prompts and making the CLI difficult to use. What steps can reproduce the bug? Start Codex CLI: codex In the prompt, enter: Analyze the repository structure and summarize the architecture When Codex tries to run a command (for example): find . -maxdepth 3 -type d | sed 's#^./##' | sort When prompted, select: Yes, and don't ask again Observe that Codex continues execution and then prompts again for another command Repeat step 4 (approve with “don’t ask again”) Observe that: Codex continues to ask for approval on every command Even identical or similar commands (find, ls, sed, etc.) trigger prompts again Approval choice is not remembered within the same session What is the expected behavior? Safe commands (find, ls, sed, etc.) should not require repeated approval in: /approvals auto -a never “Don’t ask again” should persist within the session Additional information No response Reactions are currently unavailable Metadata Metadata Assignees No one assigned Labels bug Something isn't working Something isn't working regression Behaviors that worked in previous versions but were broken due to an update Behaviors that worked in previous versions but were broken due to an update sandbox Issues related to permissions or sandboxing Issues related to permissions or sandboxing Type No type Projects No projects Milestone No milestone Relationships None yet Development No branches or pull requests Issue actions You can’t perform that action at this time.
